Parliament aims to enhance data protection in the transfer of Passenger Name Record (PNR) data to institutions in third countries.
It is very important for the use of personal data to be effective, for the use of information to be sufficiently flexible, and for it also to allow people's privacy to be protected.
Parliament calls for the preparation of a standard passenger data model and for guarantees that data will be transferred and processed for the purpose of preventing, investigating, detecting or prosecuting criminal offences, including terrorism.
It is very important for PNR data not to be used for data mining or profiling and for data review not to simply be entrusted to an electronic system, but for decisions to be taken by people.
With this in mind, it is very important to cooperate and exchange information with competent, independent institutions in order to ensure they make effective and independent decisions on the transfer of personal data.
For the purpose of combating terrorism, every citizen is a potential terrorist and, as a result, their personal data are recorded, in breach of basic human rights and institutional guarantees to ensure they are respected.
Unfortunately, the amendments proposed by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left that would have improved things somewhat were rejected.
That is why I voted against the motion.
Freedom is one of the cardinal principles on which this House is based.
This value is the foundation on which the European institutions are built, the power source that enables the market to drive a varied and complex economy, and the air that our citizens breathe as they travel to study or work in cities that once were places that they needed a passport and even a visa to reach.
There is no question, therefore, as to its importance.
The issue highlighted by this document is, rather, its relationship to security.
There is no easy solution to this problem.
The information must, in fact, be collected and analysed in the right places, but we have to remain watchful to prevent abuse.
The checks on this procedure must be continual and constant and must prevent any leakage of data.
We cannot allow people to see this as wanting to cast freedom aside, just as we cannot allow pressure for freedom to endanger the security of the people of Europe.
In my view, the document puts forward an excellent compromise to balance these two opposing principles.
I welcome the adoption of the European Parliament resolution on the global approach to transfers of Passenger Name Record (PNR) data to third countries, and on the recommendations from the Commission to the Council to authorise the opening of negotiations between the European Union and Australia, Canada and the United States, which I voted for.
This is an approach which strikes the right balance between European Union Member States' security requirements and strict respect for citizens' rights and freedoms.
The passenger name record is an extremely sensitive database which therefore needs to be protected to prevent any kind of damage being caused to those whose names feature in it.
I feel it is important for us to ensure, as part of the agreement negotiations with the US, Australia and Canada, that the data cannot be used to create profiles by extracting certain data from the record.
I agree that there is a difference between evaluating security risks and creating profiles which may prove to be false, based on misinterpretation of the data.
I hope that the agreements which the Commission is going to negotiate with the relevant countries will meet the resolution's requirements.
In the current digital era, data protection, the right of informational self-determination, personal rights and the right to privacy have become values which play a vital role and must be protected with special care.
Given this fact, I believe that the EU must respect and promote a key principle in data protection policies, and that any agreement or policy measure must also stand the legal proportionality test, demonstrating that it aims to achieve treaty objectives.
I voted broadly in favour of what this motion for a resolution proposes.
In the name of combating and preventing the global threat of terrorism and other forms of transnational crime, I welcome this initiative and the spirit of cooperation and commitment between the EU, the United States, Australia and Canada.
Nevertheless, I consider proportionality to constitute a fundamental principle of data protection policy.
Therefore, the agreements' objective of ensuring that the transfer of data is in line with European data protection standards must be studiously respected and defended.
I would also stress the importance of opening negotiations on a personal data transfer and protection agreement with the US, in the context of expanded political and legal cooperation.
However, I would reiterate that necessity and proportionality are fundamental and basic principles in ensuring the effective combating of terrorism.
The transfer of Passenger Name Record (PNR) data is an important element in the fight against terrorism and transnational crime.
However, the number of countries requesting transfers of PNR data by airlines is steadily increasing, and so close monitoring is required to ensure that European citizens' personal information is not used for purposes other than those for which it was collected and that its transfer is in line with European data protection standards.
I therefore fully support the resolution adopted today by the European Parliament, which is aimed at providing a strict framework for the transfer of passenger data to third countries.
Those countries will have to offer guarantees as to the use, storage and collection of such data, which should prevent their abuse and ensure that our citizens' rights are respected.
In order to ensure the continued security of international transport, especially in the face of the risk posed by terrorism, it is vital for countries to be able to exchange information on passengers - PNR data, collected by airlines.
However, it is just as vital to ensure that these provisions do not jeopardise citizens' fundamental freedoms or result in some people being discriminated against because of their origin or religion.
That is why the protection of personal data must be guaranteed better.
The European Parliament has one clear demand to make before the Commission starts negotiating the methods of exchanging PNR data with the United States, Canada and Australia: the protection of personal data is too sensitive a subject for these negotiations to be conducted exclusively among Member States, behind closed doors.
They must be conducted transparently, at EU level.
The data transferred must be used only within a strictly defined context and must not be transferred to a third country.
Many types of information will have to be excluded from the data that can be collected, in particular, that information in connection with ethnic origin and religious beliefs.
The protection of personal data is a sensitive issue in EU-US relations, as in the case of the agreement on the transfer of banking data (SWIFT agreement).
A general EU-US agreement on data protection is currently under discussion, as well as a new agreement on the exchange of Passenger Name Record (PNR) data.
Through today's vote on the joint resolution, Parliament has reiterated its demand that PNR information gathered should not, under any circumstances, be used for exploitation or profiling purposes.
Finally, Parliament once again calls on the Commission to provide factual evidence that 'collecting, storing and processing PNR data is necessary' and also invites the Commission to 'envisage less intrusive alternatives'.
If Parliament is not heeded, it will have the chance to use its right of veto.
I voted for this report because I think that the European Union needs to have a coherent, uniform vision with regard to signing future PNR agreements.
This will help ensure better protection for personal data and privacy, while also promoting the use of this data for combating terrorism and major cross-border crime.
I voted in favour of this resolution because I consider the recommendation from the Commission to the Council to authorise the opening of negotiations on agreements between the European Union and Australia, Canada and the United States on the transfer and use of Passenger Name Record data to be important.
These agreements should ensure that the determination to fight terrorism and criminality will not call into question the protection of civil liberties and fundamental rights, not least the rights to privacy, informational self-determination and data protection.
Personal data, their protection and the individual right to this same protection are subjects that have increasingly been attracting interest from political decision makers and civil society itself.
The available technological means constitute a significant challenge to respect for individual privacy.
This concept, too, has been called into question by the increasing voluntary and involuntary exposure to which Europeans are now subjected.
Europeans are also encountering the growing tension between the individual's right to privacy and the collective right to security.
All these issues have taken on worrying proportions since 11 September 2001 and remain current.
Terrorism and other forms of organised crime are fought today with rapid and effective information exchanges between security agencies, rather than by conventional police forces.
Without these exchanges, we would be exposed to concerted, cross-border criminal activity, with no chance of responding appropriately.
For all these reasons, I believe that it is essential to open negotiations with our partners, so that we can face collective dangers together, and to ensure that the data exchanged between the parties comply with the principles of appropriateness and proportionality to the intended purposes.
This resolution follows the dynamic created by the United States with regard to fighting the 'threat from terrorism', and so seeks to tie the Member States of the European Union to this same dynamic.
Instead of fighting the underlying causes of the problem, they are seeking to use this threat as a pretext for unacceptable restrictions on Europeans' rights, freedoms and guarantees.
Those responsible for this capitulation by the European Parliament, which goes against positions taken in the past, are now seeking to nuance it by referring to alleged principles of 'proportionality' and 'necessity', which are always debatable and subjective to assess.
The argument that there are Passenger Name Record data now that are already being transferred to third countries without any sort of checks does not hold.
If data are being used or processed improperly, it must be investigated, reported and fought robustly.
This resolution represents a capitulation that seeks only to cloak in legality something that is clearly on the fringes of it at the moment.
I voted for the resolution on the comprehensive strategy pertaining to transferring air passenger data to third countries, for it is necessary to lay down a binding legal framework to these transfers which are increasingly being used as part of the fight against terrorism.
In the course of preparing this negotiation with the USA, Canada and Australia, Parliament has laid down conditions.
Among other things, we request that data should not be used for profiling purposes and that the negotiations should be conducted with full transparency in relation to Parliament.
Moreover, MEPs must be allowed to monitor this situation closely.
The protection of privacy is a sensitive issue, which should not be sacrificed for the sake of another requirement, that of combating terrorism.
As it did in the negotiation of the SWIFT agreement, Parliament will succeed in safeguarding citizens' privacy.
I voted in favour of the resolution on the EU's external strategy on Passenger Name Record data (PNR data), since I believe that concluding agreements permitting the transfer of PNR data between the European Union and Canada, the United States and Australia is of paramount importance to international security.
I therefore welcome the Commission's recommendation for negotiations to be opened with a view to concluding these agreements.
Indeed, it has been evident for several years now that exchanging these data helps in the fight against terrorism and international crime.
These international transfers of PNR data offer our countries' law enforcement agencies precious means of combating the terrorist threat.
Furthermore, I must stress that the new global approach to PNR data presented by the Commission in October and aimed at establishing general criteria specific to all PNR agreements is very positive in my view.
It will create a more structured and more coherent framework for these agreements, and will provide significant guarantees in terms of the protection of personal data.
This resolution completely contradicts the one adopted by this House in May.
It 'welcomes' the proposal made by the Commission in September.
That proposal endorses the transfer of PNR data to third countries and contains no satisfactory guarantee as to the way in which the data will be used.
What is worse, it considers it justifiable to store these data for an unlimited period of time for profiling purposes.
What is the point of this resolution's self-righteous railing against a practice that is at the heart of a project it supports?
I voted against this resolution, which violates every human being's right to have his or her personal data respected.
Passenger Name Records (PNR) are another weapon in the fight against terrorism.
Under the Treaty of Lisbon, Parliament has to help set out a new external strategy regarding the negotiation of a new PNR agreement between the EU, the USA, Australia and Canada.
As a great advocate of the fight against terrorism, the EU is prepared to negotiate any agreement that may be effective in this fight.
The Union will not, however, endanger civil liberties and fundamental rights.
I fully support the objective of preventing and combating terrorism and other serious transnational crime.
More and more countries are using passenger data for this purpose.
In the digital age, however, it is crucial to pay particular attention to the enforcement and protection of civil liberties and fundamental rights, including the right to privacy and data protection.
The key principles that must be prioritised in this area are necessity and proportionality.
The collection of passenger data must not just be useful; it must be necessary too.
The principle of proportionality must also be invoked to prevent the planned measures from going above and beyond what is necessary to achieve the objectives set.
There can be no question, therefore, of using the data for the purposes of exploitation or profiling.
Since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon, the European Parliament has made a major contribution to the efforts to conclude these agreements, and therefore it must be fully and regularly informed of any developments relating to PNR data.
In recent years, fundamental rights have increasingly been curtailed as part of the so-called war on terror.
The rationale behind this is extremely questionable.
While passengers are searched almost down to their underwear and are not allowed to carry nail files or deodorant in their luggage, checks on freight are often left to the shipping companies themselves.
If this is to change in future, it is important that the balance between freedom and security is preserved.
In the case of passenger security checks, this balance has already been lost and, therefore, as the hysteria surrounding terrorism subsides, the regulations will once again be relaxed.
Just as questionable is the issue of whether the FBI needs to know the name, address, e-mail address, credit card number and number of suitcases of people travelling to the USA and whether it should be permitted to store this data for up to 15 years.
The information should only need to be kept in a few exceptional cases.
If fundamental rights are infringed in order to create a sense of security, the infringement must be as limited as possible and the rights of those affected must be reinforced.
Unfortunately, this is unlikely to happen at the moment and, therefore, I have voted against the motion.
It is true that evaluating and processing Passenger Name Record (PNR) data at an international level can help in combating terrorism and organised crime.
However, agreements of this kind often cause problems with regard to data protection.
Therefore, the European Parliament must take a consistent approach on this issue (in a similar way as in the case of SWIFT), in order to protect the fundamental rights of EU citizens.
There are currently a number of regulations governing the transfer of PNR data to third countries with which the EU has concluded agreements.
The more countries which demand this data, the greater the risk that the different systems will have a negative impact on legal clarity, the protection of personal data and the costs for airlines.
Therefore, the EU must put in place uniformly high security standards, which will guarantee a coherent approach in future.
This is what I expect from an efficient EU foreign policy strategy for the transfer of PNR data.
This motion for a resolution does not guarantee this and I have therefore voted against it.
I endorse the objectives that the Commission proposes in its communication.
The reasons that make it necessary and useful to use and exchange Passenger Name Record (PNR) data with third countries for security purposes need to be made transparent and understandable.
At the same time, the parties involved need to show that they are fully aware of the implications that such actions may have on private life and of the need for them to be carried out under a set of uniform, explicit and strict data protection rules, which must be enforced even when data are transferred to other countries.
The use and exchange of PNR data will not only improve people's security, but also facilitate their lives and their movements across borders.
With PNR data, police checks can be considerably reduced and surveillance can be focused on those passengers for whom there is a well-founded reason to believe that they might pose an actual risk, thus sparing the others pointless checks and inspections.
The European Parliament voted in plenary today in favour of a joint motion for a resolution on the renegotiation of PNR agreements and the adoption of strict data transmission criteria, in order to achieve passenger safety predicated, as always, on respect for personal data.
The main objective is to collate, transmit and process PNR data on a restricted basis, so that they cannot be used for data mining or profiling.
I voted for the motion for a resolution on Passenger Name Record data as part of the European Union's foreign strategy because, by establishing a series of basic common principles for agreements with third countries, it safeguards European data protection standards.
At the same time, this motion for a resolution meets the objectives of compliance with the law and strengthening of security, not least the fight against terrorism.
Simultaneously, the European Parliament is reiterating its demand to be kept informed about all the relevant developments in this field, and is playing an active part, which is its prerogative.
Combating terrorism and other forms of transnational and organised crime is impossible without data exchange that is more effective, more guided and faster, both within Europe and at international level.
This makes it essential that the security measures adopted do not compromise the protection of civil liberties and fundamental freedoms, or the greatest possible respect for private life and data protection.
In accordance with the principle of proportionality, therefore, it will be important to ensure that only data indispensable for security purposes are collected and processed.
in writing. - Several groups agreed on this text that basically recalls Parliament's determination to fight terrorism and organised and transnational crime, and, at the same time, its firm belief in the need to protect civil liberties and fundamental rights, including the rights to privacy, informational self-determination and data protection.
Parliament reaffirms that necessity and proportionality, as set out in Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Articles 7 and 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, are key principles in ensuring effectiveness in the fight against terrorism.
It welcomes the Commission communication on the global approach to transfers of PNR data to third countries and welcomes the recommendation from the Commission to the Council to authorise the opening of negotiations for agreements between the EU and Australia, Canada and the USA for the transfer and use of PNR data to prevent and combat terrorism and other serious transnational crime.
It also welcomes the decision of the Council to start all negotiations simultaneously, while acknowledging that the length of the negotiations may vary.
On 21 September 2010, the European Commission presented its global approach to transfers of Passenger Name Record (PNR) data to third countries.
The purpose of transferring and processing data, such as ticket information, seat number, luggage details, route and payment type, is to prevent, investigate, detect or prosecute criminal offences, including terrorism, within the framework of police and judicial cooperation on criminal matters.
This 'global approach' is intended to act as a guideline for future negotiations with third countries.
Negotiations with the USA, Canada and Australia will be opened shortly and other states have expressed similar intentions.
The European Parliament's motion for a resolution confirms once again the importance of the principle of proportionality.
The needs of security and freedom are in a delicate balance.
We are calling on the Commission to provide factual evidence that the collection, storage and processing of PNR data is necessary for each of the stated purposes and to carry out an adequate investigation into possible alternatives.
The European Parliament maintains its position that PNR data must not, under any circumstances, be used for data mining or profiling.
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution on innovation partnerships because I consider them an essential element of the actions committed to as part of this flagship initiative.
In the current climate of austerity in public budgets, of significant demographic change and of ever increasing competition at global level, Europe's competitiveness and, above all, our future standard of living, depend on our ability to integrate innovation into products, services, companies, and social processes and models.
I therefore consider it crucial that innovation has been put at the heart of the Europe 2020 strategy.
Innovation is our best means of tackling the major social challenges that we are facing, such as climate change, energy and resource shortages, or health and ageing.
It is essential that the responses that are found to these challenges help to create a Europe that is fair from the economic, social and environmental sustainability points of view.
I welcome the 'Innovation Union' initiative, whose goal is to integrate Europe in innovation terms by cooperating in a well-coordinated way at regional, national and European level.
I applaud the European innovation partnerships, which are an innovative concept aimed at creating synergies between existing initiatives and, potentially, new European and Member State initiatives in the field of innovation.
I welcome the proposed theme for this first pilot partnership: active and healthy ageing.
Some of the most serious social challenges faced by Europe, such as the ageing population, require radical innovation that cuts across several sectors.
Responding to ageing requires changes at all levels, from the right to work and pensions, to new service models, including self-administered care and new types of accommodation.
The struggle against new risks and inequalities requires innovative approaches in the social field, not just through implementing new technology, but also through innovative organisations.
I call on the Commission to guarantee funding for the partnerships, bringing together the resources of the European Union, the Member States, the regions, and other public and private actors for this purpose, following clear and transparent criteria.
Full advantage must be taken of Europe's innovation potential.
This cannot be merely a statement of principle, and I am delighted that we have finally arrived at a proposal like the one in question.
Many efforts and ideas which, by themselves, remain in the abstract, can now be part of a system and can be brought to fulfilment to meet specific needs.
The topics are highly pertinent today, and every effort must be made to ensure that all relevant players take part.
I particularly welcome the reduction in red tape and the active involvement of small and medium-sized enterprises, which are packed with innovative energy that just needs to be released to benefit the whole Union.
I just hope that the programme will be implemented appropriately.
The European Parliament resolution on European Innovation Partnerships within the Innovation Union flagship initiative is a specific initiative aimed at devising an integrated European innovation policy.
What makes it all the more important is that we need to acknowledge that we have not achieved all our objectives included in the Lisbon Programme from 2000.
Indeed, innovation and the expansion of the R&D sector must be one of the drivers of future economic growth.
I welcome the introduction of the innovative concept of European Innovation Partnerships, which is intended to generate synergy between current innovation initiatives.
We will have to monitor closely how the first pilot programme in this area progresses because it deals with a theme which is of concern to the whole of Europe: the impact of an ageing population and extending working life.
I voted to adopt this resolution, while also taking into account the further themes which will be dealt with after the pilot project has been assessed.
These are themes of general interest.
I voted for this resolution because I believe that the principle of innovation partnerships in the public and private sectors can boost research and innovation activities and help revive demand during the crisis.
They also have an important role in achieving the Europe 2020 strategy objectives in terms of creating a more competitive economy and a fairer, greener society.
European innovation partnerships are an innovative concept aimed at creating synergies between existing initiatives and, potentially, new European and Member State initiatives in the field of innovation, as well as maximising and accelerating the delivery of results and benefits to society.
They are, therefore, an important tool at a time when the Member States are struggling with important economic issues, where I believe a commitment to innovation could be an effective strategy.
I welcome the proposed theme for this first pilot partnership: active and healthy ageing.
While the European population is ageing and this is seen as a negative factor, it is important for Europe to be able to make good use of its human capital, especially people who are older and therefore have more experience and often important knowledge to pass on.
in writing. - The concept of the European Innovation Partnership is a vital part of the commitments under the flagship initiative.
The group which I am part of in the European Parliament, the S&D, wholly endorses the 'Active and Healthy Ageing' pilot European Innovation Partnership and puts forward suggestions for two additional partnerships in the areas which would benefit urgently from the created value added.
Ladies and gentlemen, I was pleased to hear the results of today's vote on the motion for a resolution on innovation partnerships.
I think that work on this document has led to the development of an unequivocal and ambitious position.
The Innovation Union initiative is very important and is, at the present time, the most concrete attempt at an integrated European innovation policy.
I would like to emphasise that it is important to take account of the Europe 2020 strategy in our work, because Europe 2020 includes an increase in attention to research, innovation and education in the future.
Innovation is one of the engines of the economy and will make a decisive contribution to realising the EU 2020 strategy.
The partnerships advocated here could be influential in this respect, since they create very important synergies for maximising and accelerating innovation processes.
It also seems important to me that the pilot project is dedicated to the area of active and healthy ageing, since the ageing of Europe's population is the undeniable reality.
The EU must also continue to support other areas of innovation despite the financial crisis through which we are living, as without it, we will not successfully realise the ambitious objectives already set out for the EU in the EU 2020 strategy.
The Innovation Union is an innovation strategy which is being promoted at the highest political level.
It is one of the central initiatives of the Europe 2020 strategy.
The idea behind it is to enable us to meet future challenges, such as climate change, energy and food security, health and an ageing population, in an appropriate way and to raise them to a transnational level.
The result will be to allow blockages caused by financing problems, fragmented research systems and markets, inadequate support for innovation in public contracts and slow standardisation to be managed more effectively.
I have voted in favour of the resolution because a joint concept, such as that of innovative partnerships, will bring benefits for every Member State.
The benefit of the new concept of innovation partnerships lies in the clear-cut scope and spheres of responsibility for the various partners involved.
It also includes precise deadlines for the implementation of individual projects, together with measurable and achievable targets.
In addition, it offers simplified administrative procedures for implementing projects and improving the dissemination of research findings.
Therefore, I have voted in favour of this report.
I voted for this resolution because I believe that in the current climate, innovation partnerships constitute an important instrument in building a Europe that is economically, socially and environmentally sustainable.
I also welcome the choice of subject for the first partnership: active and healthy ageing.
in writing. - With the adoption of this text, Parliament states that the Innovation Union initiative is the most significant to date and a concrete attempt at an integrated European innovation policy, whose success depends upon well-coordinated cooperation at regional, national and European level, with the maximum involvement of all relevant players at each level.
The European Innovation Partnerships represent an innovative concept aiming to create synergies between existing and, where necessary, new European and Member State initiatives in the field of innovation and maximise and accelerate the delivery of results and benefits to society.
Parliament therefore welcomes the first proposed topic for European Innovation Partnership, on active and healthy ageing, and the suggested approach by the Commission to first run a pilot project testing the most suitable format for these partnerships before launching any further ones, and calls on the Commission, when running the first pilot project on active and healthy ageing, to include social innovation which leads to a better quality of life, prevents disease, improves social networks within public sectors and among social partners, and promotes the introduction of new technologies supporting the quality of life.
At the present time, when we are coming out of the crisis and are standing before the new challenges which await the EU after 2013, innovation is one of the most important ways - if not the most important way - to consolidate the EU's position in the world.
Innovative use of resources may prove to be one of the best methods for eliminating disparities between states or regions.
It will also contribute to preserving the diversity of these areas by using good practices and the experience of other parties.
The development of new types of production or services and the innovative use of resources will contribute to the rational and effective development of local, regional and national markets.
Innovation is human creativity.
By looking for innovative solutions, we contribute to an increase in the well-being of society.
At a time when the economy, technology and information science are undergoing dynamic development, we must not forget the most significant factor - human capital.
Innovation is not just new production methods or new uses, for example, of local products.
In addition to this, and above all else, it is human capital.
Finding new ways of involving society in development processes in many areas of life is an essential condition for success.
Cooperation at a variety of social levels is slowly becoming an essential requirement, especially in the field of research and education.
Innovation partnerships are the next step - and also a very obvious one - in a developing Europe.
Innovation is the best way of successfully tackling the challenges with which the European Union is currently faced.
At a time of austerity, demographic change and threats from globalisation, it is a means to the end of making Europe more competitive and creating jobs, on which all priorities are focused.
The aim of the 'Innovation Union' flagship initiative envisioned by the EU 2020 strategy is to launch innovation partnerships to streamline research, development and the arrival of inventions on the market, starting with the area of healthy ageing as a pilot project.
It seems relevant to me for other areas to be covered, such as young people, researchers, and small and medium-sized enterprises.
It is also desirable for work to be better carried out in partnerships, as we have unique potential in terms of values, creativity and diversity.
I therefore call for more and better investment in education, research and development: these priorities must not only be protected from budget cuts, but must even have their budgets increased.
I have voted in favour of this report, because the Innovation Union initiative is a concrete attempt at an integrated European innovation policy.
The first proposed topic for the European Innovation Partnership on active and healthy ageing aims to bring about a better quality of life and improve social networks within the public sector.
Whether other similar initiatives are started will depend on the results of this pilot project.
The motion for a resolution that has been adopted today contains proposals that offer a great deal of potential for added value, including smart cities, which focuses on improving energy, transport and infrastructure efficiency and management, and raw materials, which aims to increase the security of supply of raw materials, together with sustainable extraction and processing, recycling and substituting.
The European Parliament would also like to contribute to the successful implementation of this promising initiative and is therefore calling on the Commission not only to inform Parliament of the progress of this pilot project, but also to outline Parliament's involvement in determining the strategic orientation of future partnerships.
in writing. - (LT) I supported this resolution.
The Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is an integral part of the Euro-Atlantic, Eurasian security architecture with a comprehensive concept of security, including political and military, economic and environmental, and human dimensions.
However, in spite of its importance, the OSCE is the sole organisation among those dealing with security issues that lacks an international legal personality and consequently, there are many political and practical legal implications.
This organisation has an essential role to play on a number of issues, including non-proliferation, disarmament, economic cooperation, and protection and promotion of human rights.
However, the lack of a legal personality and problems with the decision-making mechanism weaken this organisation, because it is not always able to respond to crises appropriately or in a timely manner.
I agree with the proposals expressed in the resolution on the necessity to continue the dialogue on the legal framework of the OSCE, and the call on Lithuania, which will hold the OSCE Chairmanship in 2011, to ensure continuity and progress in the process of strengthening the OSCE.
There is no doubt that security is a stumbling block where the strengthening of the EU political integration process is concerned.
In particular, it is worth stressing the need for appropriate implementation of a common foreign and security policy that takes account of the specific nature of individual countries and yet achieves a degree of effectiveness in proportion to the role that the European Union will come to play on the international stage.
The principles of peace and freedom that were proclaimed in the Treaty of Rome and the others that followed it must continue to underlie any decisions that are to be made.
So far, the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe has shown that the way in which it performs its duties is absolutely compatible with these principles, and therefore greater involvement by the EU's institutions in this organisation would be desirable.
I also believe that taking greater responsibility may help the Member States reach common positions, thus consolidating relations among the 27 countries on these topics as well.
I voted to strengthen the OSCE, which must be based on harmony between the three main pillars that the organisation is founded on: political and military, economic and environmental, and human.
This strengthening of the OSCE must create the framework for achieving a balance where none of these aspects is supported at the expense of the others.
The effectiveness of the actions taken against security threats and challenges depends on the proper coordination and operation of these three strands.
The OSCE must be a key factor in the response mainly to new threats, such as organised crime, terrorism, cyber attacks, human and drug trafficking, as well in the activities aimed at warning about, preventing and resolving conflicts.
One other reason why I voted for strengthening the OSCE is the human rights aspect, involving respect for minorities' rights and fundamental freedoms, which are key elements in the OSCE's integrated security concept.
I voted in favour of this resolution because I advocate intensifying the efforts of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to mitigate human contributions to global warming.
More effective cooperation between the Member States and the OSCE on combating the threats and problems caused by economic and environmental factors could make a crucial contribution to security, stability, democracy and prosperity in the region, since there are economic and environmental factors underlying the conflicts themselves.
We live in a world in which security has become a fundamental concept, whether it is security in its traditional sense relating to defence, or economic, environmental, energy supply or transport security.
That is why the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is taking on a crucial role at a more global scale as an integral part of the Euro-Atlantic and Euro-Asian security architecture, which stretches from Vancouver to Vladivostok.
I agree with the final recommendation in the sense that Parliament should reflect on its participation in the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly and study the possibility of establishing a standing delegation.
At this time, I would stress that the EU cannot fail to speak up in the OSCE on sensitive issues such as the defence of human rights and observance of international law.
The European Union and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) share the same principles and values in areas such as the promotion of human rights, conflict prevention, the development of democratisation, the protection of minorities, and also more recent challenges such as climate change.
It is essential to develop synergies between the EU and the OSCE to achieve these common aims.
The OSCE is the only organisation lacking an international legal personality that intervenes on security issues in the European region.
In that respect, it is more important than ever to strengthen the existing OSCE structure so as to ensure fruitful collaboration with European institutions, particularly following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon, and in view of the forthcoming creation of the European External Action Service.
Establishing a standing EU delegation to the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly would help to strengthen cooperation between the EU and the OSCE and would facilitate close monitoring of its activities and the implementation of shared principles and values.
No aspect of the EU's security can be neglected.
The Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is a good reflection of this, as it is an integral part of the Euro-Atlantic and Euro-Asian security architecture, which is characterised by a global conception of security that includes political and military, economic and environmental, and human dimensions. The members of the OSCE are also very varied, including countries that stretch from Vancouver to Vladivostok.
I therefore think that it is important for the EU to make an effort to strengthen its role in the OSCE, given its global nature and the diversity of its members.
For some years, the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which was founded during the cold war as an institution for monitoring and confidence building purposes, has been undergoing an identity crisis.
According to critics, the organisation is not equipped to meet the challenges of the 21st century, such as the global financial crisis and environmental issues, including climate change.
In theory, the three main players in the OSCE are the USA, Russia and the EU.
Even though the situation has improved slightly under the influence of the new president, American foreign policy has very little interest in multilateral organisations.
Russia appears to have equally little interest and sees the expansion of the EU and NATO as an intrusion in its historic sphere of influence.
As a result, it is understandable that Moscow is calling for the OSCE to take a new direction and to shift its focus from human rights and the process of democratisation to establishing a European security structure.
Russia is essential to the EU, not only because of its supply of energy, but also as a strategic partner.
If the EU wants to change its role in the OSCE, it must become a counterpole to the USA, rather than a powerless paymaster.
Ultimately, a sensitive approach will be needed not only in relation to Russia, but in relation to all the Eurasian states which are represented in the OSCE but who are not members of the EU.
As the report takes this into account, I have voted in favour of it.
There is a need to maintain a balance between the three dimensions of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
In any case, security threats must be tackled across all three dimensions. This also applies to current threats such as organised crime, terrorism, cyber threats, human and drug trafficking, energy security, as well as activities relating to early warning mechanisms and conflict prevention and resolution.
It is both sensible and beneficial to reinforce the interaction and promote the synergy between the EU and the OSCE.
For this reason, I have voted in favour of this motion for a resolution.
The European Union and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) need to be strengthened.
The role of the latter is important and essential in a whole series of sectors, particularly for the part it plays in security and the defence of democracy.
Even if these two organisations have different needs, objectives and structures, it is important that there are no contrasting positions or overlaps liable to cause conflicts of competence.
Their roles are defined and different, but in any case, there is a risk of duplication in some areas.
I voted in favour of this resolution, since I support both its content and its spirit.
Indeed, I believe that OSCE is an essential organisation that positions itself as a forum and takes account of both EU-Asia and EU-United States relations.
Clearly, given its Member States, the European Union is both the fulcrum and the base of the OSCE, so I hope that it has a leading role within it.
I voted for this resolution because I understand that the OSCE should be used to its full potential.
Profound reflection is therefore needed on how the European Union can take on more responsibility and participate more actively in achieving common goals.
in writing. - By adopting this resolution, Parliament emphasises the need to maintain a balance between the three dimensions of the OSCE, developing them coherently and comprehensively and building on what has already been achieved.
It points out that none of the dimensions may be strengthened to the detriment of another.
It stresses that security threats and challenges should be tackled through all three dimensions if action is to be truly effective, including contemporary ones such as organised crime, terrorism, cyber threats, human and drug trafficking, energy security, as well as activities relating to early warning mechanisms, and conflict prevention and resolution.
It emphasises that the strengthening of the OSCE should not come at the price of weakening the existing institutions and mechanisms or affecting their independence, when they have not yet been reformed or alternatives have not yet been agreed, particularly as regards the work of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR).
Finally, it calls on the OSCE to further strengthen its capacity to ensure respect for and the implementation of principles and commitments undertaken by its participating states in all three dimensions, inter alia, by enhancing follow-up mechanisms.
Ladies and gentlemen, as many of you know already, Lithuania will take over the Chairmanship of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in January 2011.
This chairmanship could be a unique opportunity for my country to take initiatives to strengthen regional cooperation, increase energy security and combat corruption.
It is also important not to underestimate the human dimension of OSCE cooperation.
As well as its political and military dimension, the OSCE also plays a crucial role in promoting respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
The EU must also play an important role in this field.
The coordination of EU and OSCE activities in the field of human rights is a common interest we all share.
Let us not forget the circumstances in which the OSCE was established.
This year marks the 35th anniversary of the inaugural conference of the OSCE and the Helsinki Final Act, when the foundations of this organisation were laid.
This event symbolised a moral and political commitment to the principles of democracy and human rights.
It is regrettable that this spirit of Helsinki has dimmed in recent years.
This must change.
I therefore await the results of the OSCE summit this December in Astana with much impatience.
I have voted in favour of this report because the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has lost a great deal of its influence over the last ten years.
In the motion for a resolution, the European Parliament praises the activities of the OSCE in the past and calls on the Member States, the Commission and the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to come up with proposals as to how the Union can effectively become involved in the OSCE and can contribute constructively to achieving the shared objectives.
Anyone who wants to avoid military intervention in crises must take preventative political measures in good time.
History teaches us that armed conflicts are an outcome of the inability of the combatants to talk about contentious issues and find compromise solutions.
The OSCE represents a forum for seeking such solutions.
At the same time, the OSCE is today respected as an independent arbiter in assessing the democratic running of elections, and democratic standards.
I am therefore in favour of strengthening the OSCE, particularly in relation to the spreading of democracy and compliance with human rights.
The OSCE monitoring and field missions are an important part of the expansion of the free world.
However, from an EU perspective, some activities are being duplicated here.
If we are talking about strengthening the OSCE, we should, at the same time, think about the extent to which the OSCE can replace the activities of EU representatives in various conflict regions.
Also, as we are praising the work of the OSCE in the area of human rights, this opens up the possibility of discussing the extent to which the roles of the OSCE and the Council of Europe overlap.
The aim of this discussion should be to achieve higher efficiency in the spending of public funds, which, in a time of cost cutting, is undoubtedly a priority for our voters.
I voted for the report on the demographic challenge and solidarity between generations because, under the current circumstances of the unprecedented demographic problems posed by increased life expectancy and falling birth rates, they constitute one of the most urgent social policy challenges of coming years.
Decisions need to be taken urgently, especially at a time when the availability of jobs for young people and the sustainability of pension systems for older people are at risk.
Solidarity between generations is needed to enable the contributions of both generations to be optimised.
The only way that this will be possible is by guaranteeing free and equal access to jobs, lifelong training and career progression for all ages.
That will be possible, firstly, through ensuring that young people are guaranteed jobs and, secondly, through making good use of the contribution that older people can still make to society, notably in terms of voluntary work and of their continuing to work beyond the established retirement age.
While emphasising that a society which respects human dignity is based on the principle of justice between the generations, I believe that this report is important in terms of combating prejudices and discrimination in every form and against every group in society as well.
I maintain that the migration of citizens, their successful integration, including into economic life, and their social inclusion, can provide a means of tackling demographic change.
For these reasons, I agree that an open debate is required to discuss various immigration policies.
Eradicating prejudice about different cultural models is a prerequisite for the successful integration of immigrants, which also complements solidarity between the generations and cultures.
The report also proposes adopting new provisions against age discrimination with regard to accessing goods and services.
This is why I voted for Thomas Mann's report.
According to the Commission's estimates, demographic changes are in danger of profoundly altering population structure and age groups.
Thus, the number of young people aged 0 to 14 would drop from 100 million to 66 million in 2050.
As for the population of working age, it would peak at 331 million around 2010 and would then decrease regularly to around 268 million in 2050.
Faced with this situation, the EU must provide a suitable solution in order to protect employment among older people, but also among young people.
I voted for this initiative report by the European Parliament which calls on Member States to think about the possibility of scrapping legal retirement ages but which also provides the broad outlines of a policy enabling us to fight against discrimination, to set lifelong learning as a goal, to promote a reflection on new ways of organising work within businesses - particularly with a view to reducing stress.
Furthermore, this resolution contains many initiatives highlighting, for instance, the fight against youth unemployment or in favour of a decent pension and proposing a European Pact for the over-50s.
I support strongly what this report says on raising skill levels so that quality education and better opportunities for lifelong learning would await every group and generation in society.
I welcome the recognition given in the report to the good and the benefit to EU society achieved by all those engaged in voluntary work, working to develop the local community and to provide a care service in the community or the family.
Moreover, I support the initiative of the European Parliament with regard to seeking a review of healthy ageing in the EU and to presenting an Action Plan for the Year 2011, which would aim to help increase the dignity, health and quality of life of older people.
The Commission must be commended for its call to action as regards tackling infringements of the rights of older persons and as regards protecting the elderly in the community and in nursing homes.
in writing. - (LT) I support this report.
We are now facing a twofold crisis - a high unemployment rate among young people coupled with a question mark over retirement pension funding. These two phenomena are related and therefore, they should be dealt with together.
Demographic change is manageable and sustainable if it is properly anticipated and taken seriously by everyone.
The Member States possess the main instruments for ensuring balance between the generations and ending unfair discrimination.
Where there is insufficient monitoring of pension systems, national budgets, healthcare, education and employment policy, structural reforms should be carried out and new sustainable solutions found.
At the same time, the EU should be responsible for exchanges of best practice between the Member States, for monitoring the implementation of EU legislation in the Member States, and for taking the initiative in adopting new legislation in these fields.
There were some very good points in Mr Mann's own-initiative report on the demographic challenge and solidarity between generations, in particular, concerning the importance of the intergenerational contract in our modern-day societies, youth unemployment and the need to address the challenges faced by the elderly in parallel with those faced by young people.
Nevertheless, I voted against the resolution because certain paragraphs were unacceptable, in particular, those regarding pensions.
Fortunately, the paragraph explicitly mentioning the need to replace the pay-as-you-go system with capital-funded systems was rejected by a large majority in this House. However, another paragraph, which calls on 'Member States to look again at the feasibility of scrapping compulsory retirement ages', was adopted.
That is truly unthinkable!
Yes, there must be more flexibility in the pensions system, but the retirement age must remain a fundamental pillar of it!
At a time when the Commission is concluding its consultation on the future of pensions in Europe, Parliament's message is particularly important.
That is why I decided to vote against the resolution.
in writing. - (LT) I voted for this report, because we must strive not for conflict and competition between generations, but equal opportunities and solidarity.
However, I did not support the European Parliament rapporteur's opinion that early retirement should be eliminated.
Actually, very often, elderly people are forced to take early retirement because of certain circumstances, not as a matter of choice.
Given the consequences of the economic crisis, the opportunity to take early retirement is often the only chance of survival for elderly people who have been made redundant.
Therefore, given the fact that national pension systems differ between the Member States, we must take into account the practice in all Member States, and not follow the example of one or just a few countries.
The Member States themselves must reach a decision on the implementation of early retirement provisions, taking into account their country's situation and practice.
Once again, I would like to draw attention to the fact that both demographic changes and age discrimination are undermining intergenerational solidarity and economic growth.
Such discrimination severely constrains access to the labour market for both older and younger workers.
In recent years, EU Member States, faced with a dramatic decline in the birth rate, have had to cope with an increasingly ageing population.
The rise in life expectancy is a positive development, keeping people physically and mentally active for longer.
In these circumstances, it is becoming clear that we need to face the prospect of the situation becoming even more serious, resulting in a demographic imbalance which will have its impact on Member States' economies and budget resources, a development which has repercussions as well for the EU as a whole.
Therefore, we are facing the possibility of future generations bearing the financial burden for these demographic changes.
This situation makes the Lisbon objective of having half the population aged between 55 and 64 in employment absolutely essential, even if it has been missed this year.
To counter this phenomenon, swift and decisive measures must be taken, in a lifecycle-orientated approach, to bring young and older people into the labour market.
The proportion of people out of work in the 15-24 age group is considerably higher than that for any other age group in the EU.
Therefore, the proposal for the European Youth Guarantee initiative should be recommended.
First of all, I would like to congratulate Mr Mann on the drafting of this report, which has the merit of proposing specific measures for establishing a worthwhile dialogue between generations.
I voted in favour because I believe that establishing a fair balance between generations is the only way for the younger generation to be given real assurances and to increase their participation in the labour market.
I also believe the time has come for the European Union and the Member States to examine the new questions posed by the generational challenge.
Europe will soon, in fact, be facing real problems due to its low demographic growth, and suitable policies need to be adopted straight away so as not to jeopardise the entire European social security system.
In this respect, I think it is essential to re-evaluate social policy in favour of the over-sixties.
People in this age group bring added value to the world of work, and therefore preparatory measures should be taken to involve them more.
I therefore agree with the proposal to review the social security system so as to allow the over-sixties to keep their jobs after they have reached retirement age.
In my opinion, the rapporteur quite correctly proposes two measures relating to the effects of the unevenness of demographic development on the financing of social expenditure and the financial situation of pension systems in all Member States.
The first measure aims to increase employment among young people, and the second to put back the retirement age.
I agree with the rapporteur's view that older people are not a burden for the economy and society but, on the contrary, a great benefit because of their experience of life and their knowledge.
I have decided to vote in favour of the report, because the controversial section which supported the idea of replacing the current continuous system with a system based on capital funds has been taken out of the report.
I voted against the report.
It addresses the demographic problem and solidarity between the generations in a very conservative manner.
In numerous instances, such as the almost unlimited extension of working life, it blows the workers' labour and insurance rights sky high and will exhaust them completely.
The problem of youth unemployment is growing.
Improvements to life expectancy and living standards are becoming a problem, rather than a pan-human - and, hence, pan-European - objective.
We are today faced with a high rate of youth unemployment and underfinanced pension schemes.
We must find a joint solution, since youth must be considered a precious and essential resource that must be mobilised in the pursuit of social and economic objectives, particularly in an ageing society.
If we do not manage to reverse the current trend, it is estimated that by 2030, demographic change will result in a two-to-one ratio between the active and inactive populations.
Although the main instruments for promoting justice between generations fall under the jurisdiction of the Member States, the EU plays a crucial role in terms of surveillance, monitoring the correct and effective implementation of Union anti-discrimination legislation, and in terms of promoting the exchange of best practices and action plans.
It is essential for the EU and the Member States to promote new initiatives for active, healthy and dignified ageing.
It is also necessary to establish long-term prospects for young people, and to take measures to encourage mobility during their studies, ensure high quality vocational training and create new jobs, thus securing their full participation in society.
The report brings together many topics that are all of huge importance, especially for the needier sections of the population.
I must emphasise a cross-cutting aspect to the proposals and initiatives: we have to come to terms with a world that is changing ever more rapidly, with marked repercussions on social and welfare systems.
We are well aware that the assurances we enjoyed in the past cannot be guaranteed for the future, and we have to be ready to form a society that is still able to prosper in circumstances that are no longer the same as in the present or past.
I wholeheartedly welcome the appeal for solidarity, as well as the definition of 'justice between the generations'.
I also intend to do everything possible to find a solution to the uncertainties surrounding the size of the old-age pension that my generation will encounter in my country.
Member States have available the main instruments for promoting justice between the generations and eliminating discrimination.
The number of people in the European Union over the age of 60 is set to grow at an unprecedented rate, estimated to achieve its peak between 2015 and 2035, when two million people will be added to this section of the population every year.
Given these factors, I believe that the EU must devise an effective policy so that workers can remain in the labour market and not be subjected to age discrimination.
Indeed, there needs to be as much participation as possible by women from every age group in lifelong learning programmes.
Equality and solidarity between generations within the European Union are becoming one of the most important challenges for European social policy in the coming decades.
Overall, therefore, I am voting in favour of the measures proposed in this report.
There must be a shift in paradigm with regard to how societies and economies view the ageing of the population. Instead of seeing them as a burden and synonymous with increased costs, their experience and knowledge mean that older people should be seen as a valuable asset in business culture.
To this end, businesses should be encouraged to develop age-management strategies, which would increase their competitiveness by making use of the experience and specific qualities of their older workers.
I also believe that the ageing of the population provides an important opportunity to improve competitiveness and encourage potential innovation, thereby promoting growth and creating jobs.
Finally, I should like to express my concern about the high rate of youth unemployment in the EU, and the need to create more jobs and establish long-term prospects that enable them to ensure their full participation in society.
Justice in relations between generations represents the new global challenge that needs to be adequately tackled.
Modern societies have found themselves presiding over a period of constant growth in which, above all in the last few decades, new generations have had better conditions and prospects ahead of them than previous generations.
Now, the situation has surpassed the limits of seemingly endless growth and we find ourselves faced with a debate between rights and limited resources.
All countries, beginning with the developed and democratic ones and their related organisations (like the EU), must therefore work determinedly, conclusively and cogently to work out policies, make choices and implement them coherently for a greater equilibrium between current and future generations, so that the division and distance between those with rights and those without, and those with resources and those without, may be reduced.
It seems to me that the report on the demographic challenge and solidarity between generations that we have voted on works along these lines.
in writing. - I support this report, which makes a number of important proposals to tackle the demographic challenges we face in a spirit of solidarity between generations.
Insufficient welfare provisions, inadequate social services and high levels of youth unemployment contribute to late marriage and childbirth, thus accelerating the ageing of our populations.
Both the young and the elderly experience different forms of age discrimination, particularly as regards access to the labour market and certain social services.
While Member States control key instruments such as national budgets, pension and healthcare services, the EU can further the reach of anti-discrimination legislation, particularly to protect older women in the labour market.
Moreover, women of all ages often care for young and elderly dependents.
Their work is, in itself, an example of intergenerational support and needs socio-economic recognition, although not as a substitute to the development of quality care services.
As atypical and precarious forms of work become increasingly common, the right to a decent pension at the age of retirement is threatened.
This trend can only be countered by economic policies focused on growth, respect for workers' rights and the provision of quality public services.
With regard to paragraph 24, giving older employees the option of continuing to work after the compulsory retirement age if they wish to must not lead to pressure being exerted on these employees which will result in the practice of employing people after retirement age becoming widespread.
Older employees must still be able to retire at the age specified by law without the risk of being subjected to discrimination.
As I have said previously, European society is ageing, which is often seen as a negative in economic analysis.
Naturally, the inversion of the demographic pyramid in countries where the welfare state is still strong means that there are ever fewer people contributing to the social assistance system and ever more people dependent on it.
In very blunt terms, more older people means increased spending on pensions and health.
However, a society of solidarity cannot look at ageing in this way.
It is essential to create active ageing solutions and ways to make use of the immense human potential of older people, who, even in a competitive market like Europe's, still represent an added value because of their greater experience and knowledge.
At the other end of the scale, we cannot talk about an ageing population without talking about birth policies that encourage the birth of children in the European Union.
The average birth rate in the EU is 1.5 children, one of the lowest in the world; this can only be reversed with robust policies in support of families, which do not penalise men and women who decide to have children, in economic, tax and professional terms.
This is a report full of contradictions.
On the one hand, it uses very complimentary language about older people.
On the other hand, however, it puts forward basic measures that, in practice, put the rights of older people and of workers in general at risk.
Some examples of this are:
encouraging private pension systems, thus prioritising the financial sector and forgetting the serious consequences that these practices have already had, notably in the United States, where they left millions of pensioners destitute, forcing the state to intervene;
encouraging state intervention to increase part-time work and flexible work, brushing aside the consequences of these practices, such as the devaluing of labour, low wages, precarious work, and increased numbers of workers with incomes below the poverty line;
encouraging an increase in the age at which the pension can be claimed.
We voted against the report for all these reasons, although we acknowledge that it has certain positive aspects, which are, however, threatened by the neoliberal policies that the report advocates.
As Europe goes through this period of financial, economic and social crisis, it is faced with a serious problem: unemployment.
This predicament affects young people particularly badly and is creating a worrying situation that will have dire consequences for Europe's future competitiveness.
I voted in favour of this resolution because, while recognising the principle of subsidiarity and the competence of the Member States in this area, I think the European Union should make its own contribution by encouraging dialogue among the various actors on solidarity between generations.
Tomorrow's workforce will be made up of today's young people.
If they put off entering the labour market, it will mean delayed careers, lower wages and a pay gap compared with the other generations.
We need to help young people more and support entrepreneurship and youth employment.
Only by doing so can we ensure a less uncertain future for the younger generations.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, it is a shame that Mr Mann's report, which, despite containing some good points promoting family-friendly policies, reconciling work and family life, older and younger workers' access to the labour market, etc., advocates immigration as a solution, albeit partial, to the ageing population of our countries, and even to the financing of pensions.
In every country, including France, studies show that this is not the case, not only when it comes to demographics, but also in terms of finance.
Even Mrs Tribalat, a French demographer that could hardly be accused of being sympathetic to the National Front, has come to the same conclusion.
I am well aware that in this House, we like to believe that, according to the SOS Racisme slogan, 'Mohamed will pay for Maurice's pension' .... as well as that of Karl, Matthew and Juan.
Yet that is not true, anywhere.
Mr Mann should also be careful when he recommends replacing our pay-as-you-go systems with capital-funded systems.
Given the current backdrop of the world financial crisis, this is the type of proposal that could bring ruin to our elderly people, with the likes of Madoff being the only ones to benefit.
Solidarity between generations is one of the main social challenges of European policy and of national policies for the years to come, as we face an ageing European population.
This report quite rightly puts great emphasis on this value of solidarity, on the need for intergenerational solidarity, on the importance of the contract between generations; it contains very positive passages, for instance on balancing work and family life, flexible working time, especially for women, access to employment by young and older people, fighting against discrimination, etc.
However, this report contains many things with which I do not agree; i.e. paragraph 24, which calls for scrapping compulsory retirement ages, several passages on flexible work organisation and simpler social legislation, and a passage on scrapping early retirement schemes.
Moreover, I preferred to abstain during the vote on this report.
Apart from that, I am pleased that the passage calling for the pay-as-you-go pension system to be replaced with a capital-funded system was nevertheless rejected by the European Parliament.
I voted against the report on the demographic challenge and intergenerational solidarity for it contained unacceptable stances.
There are particularly interesting things in this text, like the fact that youth employment should not be set against retaining over-50s in the labour market, as well as the emphasis placed on lifelong learning and the fight against age and gender discrimination in the labour market.
However, the text also contains many recommendations concerning pension systems that I cannot endorse. Among other things, the text invites states to scrap the legal retirement age, and lays great stress upon the need to reduce the burden of the public debt, which is tantamount to encouraging privately funded pension systems that are particularly unfair.
The report also invites states to increase employment rates by expanding part-time work, which only serves to make job insecurity worse.
These are some of the reasons why I voted against this text.
The current unevenness of demographic development has significant effects on the financing of social expenditure and the financial situation of pension systems in all Member States.
In his non-legislative report, Thomas Mann proposes two measures; on the one hand, to increase employment among young people and, on the other, to put back the retirement age.
I agree with the rapporteur's view that older people are not a burden for the economy and society but, on the contrary, a great benefit because of their experience, their life's work and their knowledge.
In this regard, I agree with the rapporteur, who is proposing concrete measures for establishing a basis for open dialogue, and calling on the Commission and the Council to introduce an intergenerational balance in all Member States and at EU level.
The principle of justice between the generations will be one of the main political challenges of the next few years.
As demographic change is influencing relationships in our society, it is particularly important that one generation is not living at the expense of another.
This not only applies to financial and budgetary policy, but also includes protecting the environment, the available resources and the climate.
In order to ensure that our society remains cohesive, we must see justice between the generations as a mainstream task.
As a result, we must examine all our political decisions in this light.
It is important that we devote our attention to this subject in order to maintain the sense of solidarity within our society in future.
I have voted in favour of the report on the demographic challenge, but against the paragraph which calls on the Member States 'to give consideration to regulated labour migration (immigration from third countries into the EU)'.
In my opinion, this wording implies a positive assessment of labour migration from third countries.
I have voted in favour of the Mann report because the recommendation to change the way in which pensions are financed in the original report was not adopted by the European Parliament.
However, I very much oppose the requirement to encourage private pension provision and to ensure that, on average, public sector pensions are no more generous than comparable private sector pensions.
In addition, I am opposed to private sector pension funds playing a more important role in diminishing the future burden of providing state pensions.
In my opinion, the pay-as-you-go system is the most economically sensible and sustainable system.
in writing. - Ireland's society is ageing at an unprecedented rate.
This initiative contains several suggestions to the Commission that would help deal with the problems that countries throughout Europe will face in the coming decades.
This report was careful to emphasise the solidarity between the generations and is clever to ensure that nobody thinks that there is one single solution to the ageing society and the problems that are entailed with it.
I supported Mr Mann's report because I believe the generational challenge should be a priority policy for future European action.
Young people are unquestionably a key resource in whom we must invest in order to revitalise the European Union economy as a whole.
In my view, they deserve special attention.
I also think it is worth stressing the importance of education and employment policy.
In fact, the strengthening of growth and employment, to be achieved through equal access to education opportunities and the labour market, is, in my view, a step that needs to be taken in order to attain certain important growth targets, such as improving competitiveness and innovation potential.
I voted against the Mann report because it is imbued with liberal thinking which uses an ageing European population as an excuse to advocate reforms to the public systems of social protection in Europe, particularly by undermining the healthcare and pay-as-you-go pension systems, by encouraging their privatisation and a later retirement age, which I reject.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that I endorsed the Mann report on the demographic challenge and solidarity between generations, because I think one of the most serious problems facing the European Union today is the question of the ageing of society in the Member States.
It is a challenge which the European Union must overcome, if conditions are to be created which promote maternity, if ever better methods of reconciling a working life with family life are to be devised and if good use is to be made of the opportunities presented by a more productive life.
The year 2012 is to be declared European Year for Active Ageing and Solidarity between Generations, and so I think that we MEPs must promote a policy of active ageing and draw attention to the new demographic challenges.
Mr Mann's report is detailed and well structured and has fully incorporated the suggestions made by the Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality, granting gender its just and necessary importance in this subject area.
This House is becoming known for implementing specific policies designed to improve equal dignity and quality of life for everyone, in all of our countries, while also recognising the known differences between regions.
I therefore appreciate and draw attention to the space devoted to balancing family life with work and private life, in particular, the space and the role attributed to women, including older women, in applying the principle of justice between generations.
We are called upon at all levels - it is important that civil society as well as secular and religious associations are involved - to respond with suitable policies to create a solid Europe without discrimination on account of age or gender, a Europe that will not grow old without seeing strong, new generations emerge.
This report argues that rising life expectancy must not have the effect of reducing employees' rights.
That is what it advocates, though, from start to finish.
Raising the retirement age as far as possible beyond 64 years old, as promised in the EU 2020 strategy, promoting casual work, replacing pay-as-you-go pension schemes with capital-funded pension schemes are some of the measures to which the European Parliament will be committed if it votes for this report.
I am voting against this unspeakable social regression.
The demographic challenge and solidarity between generations are the key points for a better future.
We must, therefore, staunchly resist all factors reducing demographic growth, particularly: inadequate welfare payments, the slow and difficult nature of integration into the labour market proper, long periods spent in insecure or temporary employment, and a lack of support for young couples are among the reasons for young people postponing forming a family and having children.
Moreover, ever higher life expectancies mean the number of older people is increasing, along with the resulting consequences.
Solidarity between generations must therefore be reinforced, so that we can have a fairer and more balanced society.
The steadily increasing life expectancy of European citizens is excellent news which favours intergenerational dynamics and exchange.
On the other hand, if we look at it in terms of the future of our pension schemes, an ageing population causes a real headache to political decision makers and to advocates of balanced budgets.
If we add to this the low birth rate in many of the 27 Member States, intergenerational solidarity is akin to Proust's Madeleine with European societies remembering things past.
To paraphrase Mr Mann's excellent report: Europe must rise to the demographic challenge, and Jean Bodin's famous formula: 'the only wealth is man' now makes perfect sense.
To maintain a fair society, one that works in solidarity, in other words, one in which we refuse to burden future generations with our public debts and in which balance between the number of pensioners and the active population is favoured, there is only one solution.
It will inevitably require action using a number of approaches: job and retirement flexibility, a humanist and realistic immigration policy, and clear complementarities between the pay-as-you-go and capital-funded financing systems, the reason why the MR delegation voted against paragraph 99 on this last matter.
I was supportive of Mr Mann's report on the whole, but I should like to emphasise that the report covers rather too many topics and does not offer solutions to problems.
The question of discrimination against vulnerable ethnic groups is very important and requires a separate assessment.
For example, in Latvia, there are over 200 000 Latgallians, who cannot even receive primary education in the Latgallian language.
We have drawn attention to this issue many times in the national parliament of the Republic of Latvia, but still no one from the ruling Latvian elite is even prepared to discuss the question.
The European Union is faced with an increasingly ageing population.
By 2060, there will be only two adults of working age for every one person over the age of 65.
Currently, the ratio is 4:1.
As a result, the older generation could become a major burden on the working population which is responsible for supporting the economy.
As it is to be expected that the retirement age will be increased, working conditions for older people should be adapted and made more attractive.
Older employees should be given better opportunities for participating in the labour market.
A new approach is also needed in society to ensure that older people are no longer discriminated against because of their reduced capabilities, for example.
I am abstaining, because although the proposals concerning healthy ageing are very much to be welcomed, there are still some unclear areas relating to the issue of a longer working life.
Our population is shrinking and the result is that it is also ageing and therefore creating an increasing burden on pension systems.
In order to overcome the demographic challenges of the future, a consistent family friendly policy is needed.
However, uncontrolled mass immigration into the EU is the wrong approach.
Therefore, I have abstained from voting.
I voted in favour of Mr Mann's report.
The development that has taken place in the European Union and its various Member States over recent decades has brought changes and consequences which are socially evident and which require support from the European institutions.
The concept of development is inevitably associated with economic, social and cultural matters, to the extent that these sectors cannot be separated when one refers to the process of globalisation and development.
In this context, the work of the European institutions should contain and provide support for this inequality, which causes a lack of social cohesion.
This common ideal would result in greater social cohesion, less economic inequality and a balanced individual and collective development of society.
Development and social cohesion must not be enemies of progress but an integral part of it for more robust integration and coexistence in society.
In this context, the demographic challenge due to the ageing of the population means that we must accelerate the process and reconsider some social structures and programmes in order to adapt them to this new landscape.
The demographic problem is making the importance of lifelong learning as a product of solidarity between the generations even more topical than ever.
Knowledge, education, training and information have no age limits.
Nonetheless, in the 2011 budget, the increase in funds for lifelong learning programmes was pitiful, despite the claims in the EU 2020 strategy and despite the Member States' promise to invest in education for all citizens, regardless of age.
The report acknowledges that we need to create instruments to support the ongoing education of citizens and strengthen those which already exist, such as the Grundtvig programme and the Leonardo da Vinci programme.
The motion is a move in that direction, which is why I voted for it.
In a European Union in which ever more people are living ever longer, in which the birth rate is generally low, and in which the demographic pyramid is already inverted, it is important that we reflect on the 'demographic challenge and solidarity between generations'.
I therefore welcome this timely report.
Furthermore, its content is generally worthy of my approval, especially as regards the future prerogative of senior citizens to continue working if they so wish, which, in fact, fits with the 'active ageing' being promoted, and also as regards promoting the employability of young people who go more than four months without finding work.
On the one hand, demographic change means that people fortunately have longer life expectancies and remain physically and mentally active for longer.
On the other, birth rates in the Member States have remained at low levels for decades, and the older generations account for an ever increasing proportion of the population.
The limits of the intergenerational contract have been reached.
Active ageing means a process of maximising the potential for people to stay healthy, participate in the life of their communities and improve their quality of life as they grow older.
I am firmly convinced that 2012 should be declared the European Year for Active Ageing and Solidarity between Generations, with a view to highlighting the contribution that young and older people make to society.
That is why I have done my best here to give all the support needed for Europe to overcome this challenge.
Age discrimination is undermining intergenerational solidarity, which is forbidden under the treaty but which remains widespread and severely constrains older and younger workers' access to the labour market, social security and certain services.
I voted in favour of adopting strong measures from Member States to counter the grey or black economy maintained by an 'undeclared' workforce, the victims of which are women in most cases, which is more than adversely affecting the EU labour market, rather than just promoting measures aiming to protect their own workers.
At the same time, undeclared work must be combated using concrete measures and sanctions against employers and/or intermediaries.
I also voted for Member States and the Commission to cooperate as well on the supervision of care services, as part of which Member States could consider setting up a network of national care contact points which could be used both at national and European level to obtain information about the care services provided and their quality, as well as to lodge complaints about the quality of these services.
Equality between generations will be one of the main challenges for European social policy in coming years.
This timely report should, therefore, definitely be welcomed, as it stresses the need to safeguard solidarity between generations and points out ways that this can be achieved, specifically as regards promoting active ageing policies.
I have voted in favour of the report on the demographic challenge and solidarity between the generations, because the recommendation to change the way in which pensions are financed in the original report was not adopted by the European Parliament.
I am very much opposed to the requirement to encourage private pension provision and to ensure that, on average, public sector pensions are no more generous, both in terms of contributions and benefits, than comparable private sector pensions.
In addition, private sector pension funds should not play a more important role in diminishing the future burden of providing state pensions.
The pay-as-you-go system must not, under any circumstances, be replaced by capital-funded systems.
In my opinion, the pay-as-you-go system is the most economically sensible and sustainable system.
However, I have voted against the passage in the resolution which calls on the Member States 'to give consideration to regulated labour migration (immigration from third countries into the EU)'.
In my opinion, this wording implies a positive assessment of labour migration from third countries.
in writing. - We Greens have supported the text because paragraph 99 (on private/capital-funded systems) was deleted, and because the rest of the text has taken some positive Green points on board.
For instance, measures concerning the retirement age should be based on the needs of the persons concerned; periods spent working, learning, caring or volunteering are complementary and provide valuable experience at all ages; there is a need to combat age discrimination and to set country specific targets for access to training and lifelong learning for older workers, broken down by age group and gender.
Older people's employability also depends on autonomy and individual choice for workers and a better work-life balance.
In order to avoid a disproportionate burden on women because of an increased demand for care in an ageing society, labour and care should be rendered compatible in all Member States and equally distributed between women and men.
The part of this report that proposes a reduction in the tax and administrative burden for companies is positive: this is an important goal for reducing competition from third countries where tax, production and labour costs are appreciably lower than in Europe.
It is also positive in proposing to limit old-age pension obligations, both because of the rise in average age and because of improved health, allowing those who wish to do so to continue working.
It is a pity that amendments that we find unacceptable have been used to insert parts that are not at all pertinent to the report and whose aim is to encourage the integration of people from outside the European Union.
That decision, which was supported by a majority in this Chamber, forces us, regretfully, to vote against the report.
I take this opportunity to emphasise that a humane society is necessarily based on the principle of justice between the generations, and that age discrimination jeopardises solidarity between the generations, leads to poverty and is forbidden by the founding treaties.
Work is more than just paid employment and both young and older people contribute substantially, including through their work in the family, to making our society more humane and improving the stability of services and workplaces.
In this report, we call on governments to facilitate and recognise voluntary work that provides care in the community and family care, and to resolve issues of legal responsibility in that regard without delay.
I also applaud this report for calling on the Member States to adopt measures to recognise invisible and informal work carried out by family members, predominantly women, of all ages in caring for older and younger members, in the context of solidarity between generations.
It is a fact that the whole of Europe is facing demographic changes, which include the ageing of society, low birth rates, population migrations from poorer countries to wealthier ones, longer life expectancies, delays in entering the labour market, the growing number of one-person households and households without children, etc. This all combines to create the enormous need for change which the new demographic challenges and the growing role of bringing generations together impose on us.
It has become essential to introduce a well thought out system of intergenerational accounting, along with reform of the system of social care and the taxation system in Europe, including pension systems, guarantees of appropriate care for the older generation and avoidance of the process which is creating the growing debt of the younger generations.
Therefore, it is essential to reform the Stability and Growth Pact, so that Member States can meet their obligations to make their pension systems more stable.
Mr Mann's report on the demographic challenge and solidarity between generations sheds light on the challenges raised by demographic change, in particular, unemployment and job insecurity, education and discrimination affecting vulnerable groups.
It highlights the need for intergenerational solidarity and puts forward some pertinent suggestions, namely, an initiative regarding a European 50-plus pact which includes combating age discrimination, the objective of full employment up to the legal retirement age and helping to reintegrate older disabled people.
The reason why I abstained from the final vote when this report was more than satisfactory is because paragraph 24, which wants to scrap compulsory retirement ages, has been maintained.
The fact is, if we have no safeguards enabling our senior citizens to take their retirement, we can no longer guarantee them a good end to their life.
I refuse to see our older people working up to their death as we saw in the 19th century.
Solidarity is one of the values governing the European Union, so realising it in terms of equality between generations is essential.
The Member States are facing a series of demographic and social challenges that make it necessary to establish solidarity between generations.
Increased life expectancy and the decreased birth rate will have terrible consequences for European social systems if specific measures cannot be taken.
Given the current situation, the European Parliament believes in the need to initiate a dialogue aimed at intergenerational relationships.
The report cuts across many sectors, going from education to employment with regard to both old and young people, to health policy and welfare payments, to family and birth rate policy, and even to the development of welfare systems, culminating in migration policies to solve the problems of an ageing society.
I hope that the initiatives included in this report can be implemented and that justice and dialogue between generations can be the reality in the European Union.
Ladies and gentlemen, the report duly notes that steadily decreasing populations in the European Union and the continuing tendency of low birth rates are creating numerous challenges for Europe's economy and society.
For these reasons, the EU labour market will experience mostly negative structural changes.
In Lithuania, these demographic problems are further compounded by the mass exodus of Lithuania's young people to work abroad.
We are a small nation and we are rapidly losing our most active 25-40 year olds, in whose upbringing and education much was invested.
Lithuania needs these young people's talents, experience and diligence to overcome the demographic challenges mentioned.
I therefore support the European Youth Guarantee initiative proposed by the rapporteur, according to which all young people in the EU would be offered a job, an apprenticeship or additional training following a period of six months' unemployment.
More should also be done to increase birth rates: accessible high quality childcare, education and mentoring for young children is the first step in the right direction.
We must also stop the social exclusion of elderly people.
We must persuade our economy and society that the elderly are not a burden.
Their experience, achievements and wealth of knowledge can be useful for all generations.
I voted against this report which, once again, shows how the majorities that govern Europe are incapable of listening to the demands of European citizens.
Although, on these matters, the European Union has no competence over the exclusive competencies of Member States, Mr Mann shatters both the social achievements gained and the principle of subsidiarity.
Among other things, the report encourages Member States to promote working beyond the legal retirement age and wants Member States to provide incentives to the over-60s to remain in work longer through the adaptation of work places to their health status.
Above all, elderly people must be entitled to a decent pension, enabling them to live life with dignity.
Furthermore, it is mainly early retirement schemes that are used to make arrangements to meet the needs of workers nearing the end of their career and yet, quite simply, Mr Mann wants to dismantle them.
Nevertheless, I welcome the fact that the European Parliament has rejected one passage explicitly calling for the replacement of the pay-as-you-go system with capital-funded systems.
Under the guise of intergenerational solidarity, Mr Mann even feels the need to remind us that older people must be treated equally as human beings with fundamental rights.
Point duly made.
(The explanation of vote was cut short pursuant to Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure)
As always, Mr Mann has done a very good job on a sensitive subject.
As a result, I was able to vote in favour of the report.
I would like briefly to add another aspect to the discussion.
As a Member of the European Parliament from Saxony, a region which is hard hit by demographic change, and as a Member of the Committee on Industry, Research and Energy and rapporteur of the own-initiative report on future innovation policy in the EU, I would like to say that at EU level and, above all, in the Member States, we must, of course, continue to combat demographic change and make the regions more attractive for young people, in particular, by increasing economic growth, creating jobs and developing a tailor-made education policy.
However, I would also like to emphasise the special importance of older workers in SMEs with regard to innovation.
The EU has finally recognised that, in particular in SMEs, it is not only new technological inventions which are innovative, but also, for example, the ability to adapt a product to meet a customer's specific circumstances or improve service processes.
Particularly in this area, it is older employees who have a wealth of experience and can make a company innovative.
For this reason, we must combat age discrimination in the workplace.
The EU and the Member States must take this into consideration in all their social and labour legislation.
Let us not become confused over terminology - the report we have adopted is more about finding new labour resources than about solidarity.
The demographic crisis is not something we found out about yesterday.
Some of us have been drawing attention to it for a very long time.
For years, we have been saying that Europe is ageing and dying.
Now it is upon us and we are frantically looking for a solution.
Cold logic offers us many. Putting back the retirement age, increasing the birth rate, bringing more women into the sphere of formal employment, and increasing the influx of immigrants and integrating them into our society.
We are willing to do all of these, and the submitted report talks about all of these.
However, I am not entirely sure it will help - and if so, for how long. This is because we are addressing not the cause, but the consequences.
We are behaving like participants in a pyramid scheme, who see that the base of the pyramid is starting to stagnate.
We are looking for new players to expand the base.
However, by deliberately giving a new meaning to words like 'solidarity' or 'work-life balance', we are destroying genuine solidarity and taking children away from their parents.
Despite this, I voted in favour of the submitted report.
I see it as an important contribution to the fundamental debate on the survival of European civilisation.
Research makes a fundamental contribution to economic growth, job creation and the creation of clean, sustainable energy.
I am in favour of increasing research funding in the European Union as it is vital to set up a European Research Area which will guarantee the highest standards of excellence, effectiveness and efficiency in research in order to attract and retain the best scientists in Europe and promote an innovative European economy based on knowledge and expertise.
Europe must invest in research to develop new products and services which will enhance the quality of citizens' lives.
I voted for this framework programme because I believe that it encourages the research community, academia, civil society organisations, companies and the industrial sector to participate in research projects.
Research and development are two major challenges for the future of the European Union in the current global context.
I therefore supported the European Parliament's initiative aimed at simplifying the implementation of the European Union's framework programmes for research.
My fellow Members and I have thus estimated that the European Commission communication on simplifying the implementation of research framework programmes proposes serious and creative measures aimed at removing the obstacles encountered by participants in the framework programmes.
This is about boosting the trust that European funding has in the candidates and about making them more risk-tolerant in relation to participants at all stages of the projects, with flexible European rules.
The resolution reflects the fact that the current system is excessively control-oriented, which results in wasted resources and in low participation.
Finally, we welcome the overall trend towards shortening the average time-to-grant and time-to-pay in spite of further progress that can still be achieved.
I support strongly what this report says on taking action for simplifying the implementation of the EU framework programmes for research.
Red tape and onerous administrative and regulatory conditions add to the complexity of the application process and contribute to the difficulty faced by small organisations and by small and medium-sized enterprises trying to get funding for the research in which they are engaged.
Since the research community itself is asking that the rules be adjusted, the procedures and requirements simplified, and more trust placed in EU research funding, it is quite clear now that there is a need to streamline the funding and administration of research to ensure that research and innovation are effective and widespread across Europe.
This simplification and effectiveness would positively affect the research situation in the EU, and would be beneficial for stakeholders as well.
I support Parliament's demand for implementing a simplification process for the purposes of stability and legal certainty.
in writing. - (LT) I voted for this report.
Science, education and innovation are pillars of economic growth and job creation.
Europe must invest in innovation if it is to develop new products and services.
These will create new sources of employment and growth, something that will both render Europe more competitive and improve its quality of life.
For some time, the research community has expressed concern that the implementation of research programmes and the development of innovations is not proceeding as swiftly as hoped because of particularly complex bureaucratic requirements.
This is a particular problem for smaller organisations, such as SMEs, high tech start ups and smaller institutes, universities and research centres.
There is a real demand for improvement and streamlining of research funding and administration.
At present, there are different rules and procedures for different instruments of the framework programme, and this severely impedes stakeholders' opportunities to submit applications.
I agree that in debating the Eighth Framework Programme for research, most attention should be paid to the simplification of administrative procedures to ensure uniform interpretation and application of rules and procedures used in all programmes and instruments.
The European Union is very well aware that research and innovation are the key to the future where they will not only create new products, but also new jobs and resources and, by extension, economic growth.
This development will definitely help boost Europe's competitiveness and, consequently, improve the quality of life.
In these circumstances, the increase in red tape associated with accessing the funding for those involved in research and innovation programmes will only help dampen and reduce the enthusiasm of those participants who are already showing signs that they have started to lose confidence in this process.
The current system should be replaced by a system which inspires more confidence in applicants.
One positive step would be to simplify the process for monitoring projects' financial and administrative aspects, while also consolidating the scientific and technological assessment process.
It should be possible, to start with, to simplify the administrative control process, which will inspire greater confidence in the scientific and business communities.
A balance needs to be struck between confidence and control and between taking risks and the dangers risks involve in order to ensure that research funds are managed properly.
I offer my congratulations on the work carried out by the rapporteur, Mrs Carvalho.
I am firmly convinced that science, innovation and research are the main drivers of economic growth and job creation in Europe.
It is no accident that research and innovation lie at the heart of the Europe 2020 initiative.
It is therefore time for Europe to invest more in these areas: to compete on the world stage, the European Union must develop innovative products and modern services.
As a result, the number of applications for funding is increasing on a daily basis, meaning that a general simplification of the financial accountability requirements is needed, together with harmonisation of the currently highly diverse rules and procedures.
I voted in favour because I agree that we need to respond swiftly to the research community, which has been clamouring for these changes.
I endorse the approach taken by the rapporteur of basing the funding system not on results, which may lower the scientific ambition of researchers, but on scientific criteria and, hence, on excellence.
Administrative simplification is one of the major priorities that Europe must address, and greater internationalisation of the framework programme may create new opportunities and possibilities for cooperation with third countries, including developing countries.
This report proposes the simplification of monitoring financial aspects and the strengthening of technical and scientific evaluation by a peer review based on excellence.
However, the report marks only the beginning of a process that is not simple.
The implementation of the recommendations will be up to the Commission, and it will need to be followed up and receive political support from Parliament and the Council if it is to carry out this task successfully.
In future, the simplification process may be extended to other European programmes, notably the Structural Funds.
Programmes which have simpler rules will also be more transparent and more efficient.
I would also like to thank my colleagues, Mr Cerexhe of the Belgian Presidency, Commissioner Geoghegan-Quinn, and all those who contributed to the public consultation for their assistance.
It is imperative to simplify access to funds for research, developing a culture of evaluation based on a partnership of trust between all those involved so as to strengthen research and innovation in Europe, making it an attractive place to live, work and be happy.
Research and development are crucially important to achieving the goals to which the European Union has committed itself under the Europe 2020 strategy.
European programmes in the field of research and innovation have been increasing significantly in recent years, both in terms of applications made to them and in terms of their budgetary allocation.
However, it is difficult for small and medium-sized organisations to handle the complexity and bureaucracy inherent to these programmes.
Accessing the programmes and preparing proposals are still very difficult, especially for those new to them; the administrative burdens for administering projects and accounting are considered too high; and the average time between the awarding of the subsidy and payment remains too long.
The mechanisms involved in the research framework programmes therefore urgently need to be updated and simplified, in order to simplify the monitoring of the projects' financial and administrative aspects while reinforcing the process of scientific and technological evaluation I welcome the European Commission's initiative to reverse this status quo, and congratulate the rapporteur, Mrs Carvalho, on the excellent work she has done in proposing concrete measures to improve the current system.
The economies of scale achieved by the European Union's research framework programmes are among the most significant contributions made by EU institutions to the welfare and long-term growth of the Member States.
That, however, is not enough at a time of intense international competition like the present.
It is always necessary, in fact, to monitor results, assess the feasibility of opportunities and maintain close relations with the scientific community, which renders society an enormous service.
Cutting down on red tape and thereby streamlining tendering procedures would allow researchers to focus on their own professional goals, through the use of resources and skills that would otherwise be wasted.
We should not forget that these funds are paid out to be used efficiently.
While merit is an essential component of efficiency, it is unacceptable that research should be hindered because researchers have to deal with bureaucratic requirements of doubtful value.
I voted for this important report, which aims to simplify the rules relating to the financing and implementation of the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7).
There is a wide consensus in favour of this report as such, as simplification is essential to improving the competitiveness and impact of research in Europe.
In a Union whose strategy is focused on developing a knowledge economy, it is essential for Europe's main instrument for financing R&D to respond directly to the needs and concerns of the scientific community:  for making the programme more accessible;  for a more attractive European Research Area;  for a greater focus on excellence;  for a stronger basis of support for technological innovation and for transferring technology to European companies.
The report gives the Commission clear guidelines and options for simplifying the FP7.
The Commission should continue this effort in the preparation of the future Eighth Framework Programme, making the user central to it.
European research cannot continue to bear the weight of the procedural errors that have affected the framework programmes up to now.
I voted in favour of simplifying the implementation of the research framework programmes, given that it is a fundamental aspect of facilitating scientific and educational development.
This, in turn, can help create new jobs and boost economic growth, thereby increasing the EU's competitiveness and improving the quality of life of its citizens.
The current system should be replaced by a system which inspires more confidence in applicants.
The rise in the number of applications for funding has been met with the increase in control mechanisms, in an attempt to ensure that EU funds are used properly.
A balance needs to be struck between confidence and control and between taking risks and the dangers risks involve in order to ensure that EU research funds are managed properly from a financial perspective.
One other reason why I voted in favour of this is also as an encouragement to new Member States in Eastern Europe so that they have the easiest possible access to the relevant funds, with the aim of raising the level of research to Western standards.
I voted for this report because I believe that there were certain shortcomings with the implementation of the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) for research which prevented it from being put into practice in the ideal conditions.
I think that this proposal from Parliament will provide the solutions needed to simplify the procedures for allocating grants and to get small entrepreneurs and those recently entered in the system more involved, as well as increase synergy between the FP7 and other European funds, including the Structural Funds.
I voted in favour of this report because I argue that research makes a fundamental contribution to economic growth, to job creation and to environmental sustainability.
Alongside the simplifications it has proposed, the European Union should create a detailed plan for developing research infrastructure in the various Member States, in order to ensure equal opportunities in accessing finance.
First of all, I should like to congratulate Mrs Carvalho on the work she did on this report and on the vote obtained, both in the Committee on Industry, Research and Energy and in this Chamber.
Naturally, this success was the result of her work and commitment to the issues of innovation, research and science.
I know that research and innovation make essential contributions to economic growth and job creation, which are essential to the EU's economic recovery in the current situation, and also contribute to the Europe 2020 strategy.
The official discourse of incentivising research and innovation is not enough to achieve this.
As the rapporteur says, recently '13 000 researchers put their name to a petition requiring more simplification and trust in EU research funding'.
That is why, as the rapporteur says, it is important to move towards administrative and financial simplification.
This report points out a route to be followed: I hope that is what is done.
It is vital that we provide incentives for researchers and investors to stay in Europe.
Combating the brain drain must remain a priority for the European Union.
To do so, we must reshape and simplify the administration and funding of research framework programmes.
Financial resources must be allocated more directly, benefiting our businesses, universities and research laboratories.
The excessively control-oriented funding system for research results in a waste of resources.
As highlighted by the report, the overall trend must be towards shortening the average time-to-grant and time-to-pay in order to encourage further participation in these research programmes.
It is critical that we throw off the administrative straightjacket that holds back the effective functioning of these programmes.
in writing. - With the growth of the European research and innovation programmes and those applying for funding, it is important that those who are applying for it will not be bogged down with the process and this move to simplify the programme is much welcomed.
My vote in favour of this report is based on three factors.
The first is the connection with my previous activities.
I mentioned the particular attention focused by citizens on research in the field of early detection and prevention of cancer.
It has become obvious that research is vital for improving people's lives, provided, however, that there is a visible link.
I therefore considered that this report, aimed at simplifying the way in which funds are granted for research, development and innovation via the Seventh Framework Programme, deserves to be supported.
The second factor relates to the importance I personally attach to SMEs as key components in economic development and the development of the European Union's global competitiveness.
The report's provisions on providing access to information and facilitating the involvement of SMEs by developing the 'one face to the customer approach' and the Open Access Pilot, and on running information campaigns, made me welcome this report and give it my vote.
Last but not least, I welcomed the contributions regarding the future Eighth Framework Programme, which must be more transparent, flexible and easily accessible.
The proposals made in the report on how to simplify, explain and assess the results are commendable.
It is essential to simplify access to the framework research programmes in order for there to be motivation for potential interested parties to access them and for important funds not to be squandered.
We cannot forget that research makes a vital contribution to economic growth, to job creation, and to sustainable and environmentally friendly energy.
It is therefore time to coordinate national, regional and European research policies, so that there are not considerable obstacles to obtaining cost-effective solutions.
That being the case, we need to move towards greater simplification and harmonisation of rules and procedures, as simplification is not just an isolated objective, but is rather a means of ensuring the attractiveness and accessibility of EU research funding.
There is increasing despondency among researchers, research institutes, universities and businesses with the research framework programmes due to the complex nature of the European Commission's tendering procedure.
However, the 2020 strategy aims to improve the framework conditions and access to funding for research and innovation to ensure that innovative ideas can be turned into goods and services creating growth and jobs.
Therefore, in the interests of efficiency and with a view to promoting the highest quality research, it was highly desirable to simplify the implementation of the research framework programmes.
We had to take these measures to remain attractive in order to attract and keep the best scientists in Europe and remain competitive in a global economy.
I welcome the draft report which intends to promote a balance between trust and control, between risk taking and risk prevention, while ensuring sound financial management.
I agree that we must simplify the funding of these programmes, but on one condition - after the result has been achieved, it must be available free of charge to all EU countries.
Otherwise, what will happen is this - one EU nation will carry out the research project with EU Structural Fund money, with common EU resources, therefore, but then, after it has obtained the result - be it a new product or new technology, it will sell it to other EU Member States.
This is unacceptable.
It is important that all who provide funding should be able to dispose of the results of research projects carried out with common EU funds free of charge.
During the economic crisis which developed out of the financial crisis, between EUR 4 billion and EUR 5 billion from the EU budget was redeployed to energy projects from other subsidy funds which still had money available in order to aid the recovery of the economy.
As the Commission explained in its presentation of the 2020 energy strategy, an investment of EUR 1 trillion is needed to develop the outdated power grid in Europe over the next few years.
It is to be expected that consumers will have to pay the cost of this, rather than the energy sector.
An important factor in this respect will be energy research, providing that it focuses on the genuinely more cost-effective technologies.
We must bring an end to the emphasis on nuclear power which, in addition to posing the risk of environmental catastrophes, is by no means cost-effective when the cost of expensive terminal storage, a problem which has not yet been resolved, is included.
We must devote our attention to green technologies.
I have voted in favour of the report.
The report aims to simplify procedures and reduce costs.
It will also create incentives for an increase in the involvement of the private sector.
For this reason, I have voted in favour of this report.
We live in a global economy, where competition is no longer represented by local, national or European businesses.
Our businesses, researchers, scientists and universities all find themselves having to compete on a global level with markets that have enormous amounts of resources available to them, often with very much lower costs than our own.
Therefore, we need to invest more in innovation and research and less in largely unskilled manual labour, as our costs will never be competitive with those of the new economic powers.
We need to create new, high level positions, promote sustainable mobility, improve education and technical skills and coordinate them with the needs of the labour market.
I hope that the next framework programme makes all necessary resources available to ensure that the European Union is a leading light in this sector, that it is always at the cutting edge, and that it is able to attract resources and human capital.
This is truly the challenge for the years ahead.
I enthusiastically welcome the adoption of this report, since, as it deals with promoting research and innovation, which are engines of the European Union's current and future growth, it gives voice to the common sentiments of the people most affected by it: the need to simplify and monitor the financial and administrative aspects of projects, whilst simultaneously strengthening the scientific and technological evaluation process.
This European Parliament report must be given due consideration during the required simplification of the Seventh and Eighth Framework Programmes for Research, Technological Development and Demonstration, and of all programmes promoted by the European Commission in the field of science and research.
I welcome the simplification measures already introduced by the Commission in the implementation of the Seventh Framework Programme, and I support the Commission in its efforts to achieve greater simplification and clarification of the rules, so as to avoid giving rise to discrepant interpretations and to reduce the risk of error, thus cutting audit costs.
The current rules are in need of simplification and clarification.
The excessive numbers of research bodies, cooperation models and management mechanisms that have grown up and the resultant complexity, which creates problems of transparency in relation to the budgetary authority and differences in the treatment of beneficiaries, are to be regretted.
Science, education and innovation are pillars of economic growth and job creation.
Europe must invest in innovation if it is to develop new products and services.
Research and innovation are at the heart of the Europe 2020 strategy.
However, it is particularly difficult for smaller organisations - SMEs, high-tech start-ups and smaller institutes, universities and research centres - to cope with the procedural complexity involved in accessing the funds earmarked for this sector.
The scientific community is urgently calling for harmonisation of the rules and procedures and for a general simplification of the financial accountability requirements.
Recently, 13 000 researchers put their names to a petition requesting greater simplification and trust in EU research funding.
It is certainly necessary to simplify the mechanisms involved in the framework programmes for research, technological development and demonstration activities, FP7 and FP8 and all the European Commission science and innovation programmes.
I believe that far more research activities are needed to measure the impact of environment and climate policies on employment and I ask the Commission to make this area a priority as part of the Eighth Framework Programme.
I should like to start by stressing the excellent work done on this report by my colleague, Mrs Carvalho, giving me an opportunity to publicly congratulate her.
Given the crucial role played by research in economic development and job creation, it is important to avoid at all costs excessive bureaucracy and unjustified delays which prevent the scientific community from participating.
I therefore welcome the simplification proposals put forward in order to promote the attractiveness and accessibility of EU research funding.
Since 1984, the successive framework programmes for research and technological development have evolved considerably, while growing in terms of both budget and the number of areas covered, which is certainly a positive thing.
They have also done so, however, at the cost of such complexity in the rules for participation that the cooperation of our best researchers is at serious risk.
The report covers the demands of the scientific community in a comprehensive and exemplary manner, along with the conclusions of the seminar on simplification organised by the Spanish Presidency in February.
This is why I have voted in favour of a report that consolidates a series of principles and lines of action such as closely linking this matter with the future of the financial perspectives after 2013, the tri-annual review of the Financial Regulation and the application of tolerable risk of error in the area of research, all of which will be fundamental for preparing the Eighth Framework Programme.
There is, however, also another series of less significant simplification measures that we can introduce into the current framework programme by way of good practice that will not only facilitate the participation of the current beneficiaries, but which I am convinced will also strengthen that participation.
in writing. - We in the Greens/EFA Group supported the report mainly because it includes some of our key issues such as civil society organisations.
See the Buzek report on the Seventh Framework Programme, Amendment 278 (Annex I, Chapter IV - Capacities - Research for the benefit of SMEs - Activities - paragraph 1, indent 2a (new)): support civil society organisations or networks of civil society organisations in commissioning research from research performers; open standards; decrease loss of time for researchers in bureaucratic processes; simplification is essential for all small actors, including SMEs, but civil society organisations should not be forgotten; open science and repositories (reference to the Berlin Declaration); seek complementarities between the FP and the CIP; international cooperation with developing countries may require specific rules.
I welcome the report in that it aims to support the research sector, with the prospect of economic growth, by simplifying the procedures for implementing EU programmes.
It is important to streamline the stages of programme access, in line with the principles of transparency, simplicity, consistency and legal certainty, to facilitate matters for small and medium-sized enterprises, universities, research institutes and local bodies.
Creation of a web portal for research participants will enable them to quickly access programme information and will improve coordination with third countries through the exchange of best practices.
I endorsed the report on simplifying the implementation of the research framework programmes.
Without simplification of the administrative formalities for the tendering and implementation procedure, there will be no growth in participation of the private sector in the framework programmes.
Taking into account the key criterion for evaluation - the cooperation of industry with science - projects which do not include the participation of partners from the small and medium-sized enterprise sector have a poor chance of being undertaken.
In addition, one of the most commonly occurring problems is the selection of foreign partners for projects.
Greater help from the Commission is still essential here.
The most important barrier to building an innovative economy is the fact that people do not know of the existence of the Seventh Framework Programme - or that they are afraid of it.
The complicated procedures are making many institutions concentrate mainly on obtaining support from structural funds.
The current achievements of Polish groups (according to the evaluation of the Polish National Contact Point on the basis of data supplied by the European Commission) are not very satisfactory.
The success rate for the participation of Polish groups is 18.56%, while for subsidies granted, it is 13.72%, compared to the EU average of 22.28% and 20.56% respectively.
This is a great loss for Polish science, which has at its disposal a huge research potential as well as superb scientific staff.
Better use should be made of the opportunity presented by FP7.
Simplifications in the implementation of FP7 will contribute to an increase in the innovativeness and competitiveness of the EU economy in the global economic arena.
Today, we are voting on an important document about simplifying procedures for accessing framework programmes for research and innovation.
Simplifying and standardising the legislative framework of European research programmes is a choice we have to make.
Indeed, science, education and innovation are the foundations for economic revitalisation and the creation of new jobs.
We need to invest in research and innovation if we want to focus on new products and services to make Europe more competitive and, at the same time, improve European citizens' quality of life.
Over recent years, the European research and innovation programmes have become notably broader in scope.
This has also brought an increase in rules and administrative procedures which, in turn, have caused greater difficulties in participating in European tenders.
Through this document, we are urging the European Commission to remove these obstacles and urgently begin simplifying the rules for accessing research funding.
I voted in favour of the resolution, hoping for greater procedural uniformity in order to allow easier and more open access to European funding, which often remains largely unused, partly because of procedural difficulties.
in writing. - (LT) Ladies and gentlemen, there cannot be innovations without research competence.
Innovation linked to cutting edge science and education is one of the engines of job creation and economic growth.
Europe must invest in innovation if it is to develop new products and services.
Therefore, as the rapporteur rightly observes, it is important for us to help simplify the mechanisms involved in the framework programmes for research.
The coordination of rules and procedures and the simplification of research funding and administration are long overdue.
It is difficult for the majority of smaller organisations (high tech start ups or universities and research centres) to cope with the complexity of the current rules.
According to this year's European Innovation Scoreboard, which compares the innovation performance of all EU Member States, Lithuania's rates are below the EU-27 average.
However, it demonstrated good progress and has great potential - Lithuania has one of the fastest Internet connections and one of the highest mobile phone penetration rates in the world.
Therefore, it is very important to continue to invest in the development of technologies and improve the implementation of national and European digital agendas.
This will make Europe more competitive and will improve quality of life.
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on her many-faceted and highly successful report.
She highlights a number of areas for improvement with regard to simplifying the administrative processes.
I was happy to vote in favour of this report.
I would like to add one brief point which I often hear about from small and medium-sized companies in the area which I represent, and that is the language issue.
Many companies which are entitled to apply for European subsidies and whose ideas will bring added value on a European scale do not have the necessary language skills to go through the application process in English.
In the Seventh Framework Programme guidelines, under the heading 'Tips for a successful application' the following text appears: 'Although it is possible to submit an application in any of the official EU languages, applications should always be submitted in English'.
This means that a project with an application which is not in English does not have a chance, even if, for example, the common working language of the group of companies in question is not English.
In order to reduce the administrative work involved for the companies at which these subsidy programmes are aimed, the EU Commission should change the way in which the project applications are examined by their experts, so that at least during the initial stage, the project documentation can be submitted in one of the Commission's three working languages.
I voted in favour of the report because we cannot weigh down our top facilities with an unsustainable administrative burden if we want our support for European research to be effective.
However, the text of the resolution and the debate on it have again confirmed my belief that public funds should be used to secure basic public services; other activities, including research and entrepreneurial activities, should be financed from private sources.
The role of this Parliament should be limited to two areas.
The first is the creation of a basic legislative framework to facilitate this type of business.
If we are asking in the resolution today for a simplification of the mechanisms and instruments used in the current system of public grants, we are solving the result and not the cause of the problem.
This is because public grants are the problem.
The second area is respect for the rights of EU Member States.
If some states ban the use of human embryos for research purposes, such research should not be financed from the common resources of the EU.
It is like taking money from a committed non-smoker and using it to subsidise tobacco cultivation.
I am in favour of simplifying support for research.
It seems to me that we should aim to create a favourable environment for those who want to invest in new technologies and innovations, rather than discussing eligible costs and accounting procedures.
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because livestock farming is going through an extremely difficult time as a result of increased animal feed prices.
We are probably on the way to another commodities bubble.
Prices on the international market have already increased by more than 16% on average since June.
Never has there been so much negotiating on the futures market, nor has there been so much money involved.
Extremely low interest rates and too much money in search of good deals are leading to an increase in dealing and financial speculation on futures contracts, without any contact with the real economy.
The figures for the largest cereals exchange in the world, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, are impressive.
Transaction records are being broken in purchases of soya, maize and wheat.
The practical result is the transfer of these increases to real market prices, even in a year when cereals are widely available.
These increases in animal feed prices are causing terrible damage to the already difficult situation of many of our livestock farms, which will be unable to pass on the increases in what they sell because of the crisis and are unlikely to be able to absorb them.
in writing. - (LT) I voted for this report.
European producers must comply with the most stringent regulations in terms of food safety and quality, the environment, animal health and welfare and labour conditions, which adds significantly to producers' costs, leaving them at a competitive disadvantage vis--vis third country producers.
The livestock sector in the EU is facing serious problems, including the rising costs of inputs, such as fuel and fertilisers, the high cost of complying with EU regulations, greater competition from third country imports and the low prices being received by producers for meat products.
To protect European producers and this important sector of the economy, the European Commission must ensure that the post-2013 CAP is adequately financed, in order to guarantee the viability of all EU farmers, including livestock farmers, and that the conditions exist for fair competition.
I voted for this resolution on the crisis in the livestock sector because I believe that the market management mechanisms in the livestock sector need to be strengthened.
With this in mind, measures need to be implemented to limit the impact of price volatility and speculation.
I believe that market instruments must guarantee an appropriate supply of cereals for providing animal feed.
In this regard, the European Commission should propose flexible market mechanisms for providing a swifter response.
In my view, it is important for the European Union to have an instrument for assessing market trends globally.
The new European External Action Service could provide an extremely suitable instrument capable of helping anticipate strategic changes in third countries and promote the European agricultural model all over the world.
I wish to end by pointing out that an assessment of the economic impact of introducing new welfare regulations must be carried out and current legislation should be fully enforced before introducing new regulations.
The market economy model developed in Europe over the decades should make us proud.
With regard to the primary sector, the transition in many regions from an economy based primarily on arable and livestock farming to one based essentially on services has been correctly managed.
The management of this transition has been underpinned by public intervention designed to ensure income stability for companies and to exclude food prices from the pressures of competition.
Many lives can be saved, and a marked saving made in healthcare spending, through the adoption of healthy, balanced diets.
The statistics also bring new issues to everyone's attention.
I am referring to the safeguarding of food supplies, a factor to which everything else is inevitably connected, and to the quality and balance of the foods that will be available on the market in the coming years.
I must mention the incomes of the thousands of families who live off the proceeds of these activities subsidised by the EU.
I welcome the fact that this report addresses the main problems in the livestock sector, and I am sure that satisfactory results will continue to be obtained for the sake of public health and European consumers.
Food market trends in recent years have been characterised by a series of paradoxes.
One of these is that, while shelf food prices have been rising, farmers, including livestock farmers in the EU, are facing an income crisis which is threatening the existence of their farms and reducing them to poverty.
We must be aware that the high quality standards imposed on livestock farmers come at a cost.
In the case where competition from imports from third countries, which do not impose the same high standards, is not kept under control - let me remind you of the incident involving the milk powder from China infected with melamine - these costs will cause a drop in EU production in this area.
Inadequate gestures are being made for the livestock farmers' benefit.
This is why the Commission's intention to release a quantity of feed cereal is just one step aimed at helping the sector which must be followed by others as well.
Consequently, I believe that the recommendations contained in the resolution, if adopted by the Commission and applied, will meet the demands of livestock farmers.
Hence the reason I voted in favour of it.
European producers are at a competitive disadvantage in relation to producers from third countries as their production costs are higher, largely due to the requirement to comply with the extremely high standards in terms of animal health and welfare, food security, environmental protection and working conditions.
Given this fact, I believe that the European Commission must actively guarantee an adequate supply of cereal for providing animal feed.
The role of rural development is essential to keep our territories alive, both because of its end product and because it is so widespread.
Seen in this context, the livestock sector is one of the most significant for our communities.
Indeed, beyond food and economic aspects (though important, and in which regard the quality of the products is ensured by environmentally sustainable techniques), farming represents the most widespread form of occupation, protection and development of rural areas.
This is why the European Union - including through the common agricultural policy, above all, in its post-2013, reformed incarnation - and each Member State must promote its continued existence, not only by coming up with innovative techniques for farming and economically and environmentally sustainable management, but also by strengthening their wider role as guardians of the environment and the land protecting them from the market crisis by reducing production costs, making the best of their products and greater organisation on the market.
It seems to me that the report on the crisis in the EU livestock sector that we have voted on works along these lines.
The markets should be governed by the reality of stocks and needs and not by speculation; that is the message that the European Parliament wants to send to the European Commission by adopting the resolution on the crisis of livestock farming in the European Union.
For Parliament, the next reform of the common agricultural policy will have to take into consideration the issue of farmers' income, which is increasingly subject to the consequences of speculation on commodities and to distributors abusing their dominant position.
Beyond the one-off response to the sharp rise in cereal prices that prompted the crisis of livestock farming, Parliament wishes to raise the issue of the place that the European Union wants European agriculture to have in the global market, namely, produce with strict standards that are imposed on our commercial partners in order to have fair competition.
As I have warned many times, the EU's excessive regulation could quickly end up becoming a factor which exacerbates competitiveness in certain sectors, livestock being one of these.
I cannot forget hearing a British farmer talking in this Chamber about the difficulties he felt when he saw that meat from his animals was unable to compete on the market, such were the requirements imposed on him by legislation.
That is the risk we are running and it is well identified in this proposal.
It is also clear that the sector's crisis could result in a significant drop in meat production throughout the EU, leading not only to the disappearance of small and medium-sized producers, but also to a market supply crisis, increased prices and greater dependence on imports.
I cannot forget milk production, which is an important issue for Portugal, so I would remind you that the policy of former Commissioner Fischer-Boel regarding milk quotas was severely criticised, and firmly and persistently opposed by farmers.
For that very reason, I again urge the Commission to review this issue.
The resolution that has been put to the vote acknowledges the serious crisis being experienced in the livestock sector, made worse by increased cereal prices, and calls on the Commission to table proposals for measures that could support the sector.
It also calls on the Commission and Council to ensure that the common agricultural policy after 2013 will have sufficient funding to ensure the viability of all the EU's farmers.
However, by defending guidelines that caused the problems currently faced by the sector, particularly small and medium-sized producers, it shows itself to be profoundly contradictory, and even contrary to the interests of these producers.
The resolution once again advocates subjecting farming and food production to competition and the free market. It also warns of the speculation on foodstuffs that has been taking place, but limits itself to calling for excessive speculation to be fought and therefore believes that speculation on foodstuffs can continue, provided that it is not excessive.
For our part, we have said it before and we are saying it again: it is necessary to break with a system that sees food as if it were just another commodity and allows speculation on foodstuffs; this leads to explosive situations of food dependency and price volatility, as has been occurring.
The crisis in the livestock sector has been particularly influenced by the increase in cereal crop prices (above all, in Italy and Spain, since in countries like the United Kingdom, grazing livestock is most widespread) and the consequent rise in the costs of production.
The downward trend in the sector is also partly due to the volume of imports from third countries.
The problems in the sector could put food safety in the EU and provisions of meat for its citizens at risk.
I therefore agree with the contents of this joint motion for a resolution, upon which I shall be expressing a favourable vote.
In particular, I believe that we need to introduce market control mechanisms and pay greater attention to the content of the bilateral agreements concluded with third countries, such as in the recent Mercosur case.
Many livestock farms in the European Union are in a difficult situation.
This is primarily due to a considerable increase in the price of cereals and, consequently, of feedstuffs.
For this reason, it is important for us to take measures which will help livestock farmers to emerge from this difficult period in a stronger position.
In addition to the rise in the feed price, two points are particularly important to me.
The first is that the high European product and safety standards which our livestock farms have to comply with must be applied to imported products that are sold in the European Union.
This would help to ensure that European farmers are not at a major competitive disadvantage to producers in third countries and, at the same time, would guarantee that all the products sold in the European Union are of high quality.
The second point is about making agricultural policy simpler and more transparent.
Unnecessary regulations take up a lot of time and cost a lot of money.
Therefore, it is important that they are removed.
This would really make life easier for all the farms within the European Union.
The motion for a resolution tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development includes a number of good proposals of this kind which will bring about a permanent improvement in the situation of livestock farms.
I am expecting to see these reflected in the Commission's future activities.
I am disappointed that Amendments 1 and 2 were adopted by a majority in Parliament.
Despite the self-inflicted interruption in supplies, we must not allow our agricultural industry to be contaminated with GMOs.
The acceptance of unauthorised GMOs and the establishment of a threshold 'for adventitious GMOs which are not yet authorised in the European Union', and which have not yet undergone full scientific testing, have resulted in a flood of authorisations of GMOs in the USA and, in particular, in developing countries.
On account of the testing capacity in these countries, this leads to an increased risk of damage to health and the environment.
Countries outside the EU now have an increasing influence over authorisation practices within the EU, with the result being an ongoing decline in the health and environmental safety levels of authorised GMOs.
In addition, with regard to Amendment 3 that has been adopted, I am not of the opinion that the current ban on meat and bone meal for non-ruminants should be reviewed.
This would increase not only the potential risk presented by genetic engineering in agriculture, but also the potential risk of a new outbreak of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE).
However, I believe that this report plays a useful overall role in highlighting the crisis in the livestock sector within the EU.
The current situation in the livestock sector is very difficult and some areas are unprofitable because of the high production costs.
On the one hand, farmers are being paid lower prices by consumers, while on the other, they are faced with major fluctuations in feed prices.
It is important for us to prevent a serious crisis occurring in the livestock sector by making immediate use of the available instruments to stabilise the market.
Another factor which has an impact on European farmers is the growing competition from third countries where production costs are lower and the increasing tendency in trade policy to exchange larger quantities of food imports for services, without at least requiring the same production standards.
I support the resolution which calls for specific measures to be taken on behalf of the livestock sector. I would like to thank Mrs Herranz for her initiative.
Against the background of the difficult market situation and the discussion which has been initiated about the future of agricultural policy in the EU, Parliament needs to make a clear commitment to giving all areas of agricultural production the necessary security to allow them to plan for the future.
European farmers have been living in a state of serious crisis for some time now.
I voted in favour of the resolution precisely in order to get started down a path which will shortly lead to a re-stabilisation of incomes for those people who have made livestock farming their life's work.
Only people who believe in their work put up with what are now grave conditions, frequently living in often difficult circumstances and having to buy their means of production at very high prices.
In this vein, allow me to express my heartfelt sympathy for all those farmers in the areas of Italy hit by flooding of late, with the hope that the resolution voted on today may also contribute to their recovery, affording them a satisfactory way of life and work.
The European livestock industry is currently undergoing a major crisis, because rocketing production costs are pushing European producers closer and closer to their survival threshold.
These very high production costs are directly related to high feed prices and our dependency on third countries for our cereals and protein plants.
I expect the Commission to include in its forward-looking legislative proposal on the future of the common agricultural policy (CAP) efficient market instruments and the necessary funding to ensure that the feed and cereal market remains stable and to guarantee livestock farmers the security to plan for the future.
We also need a European protein plan which will promote the cultivation of protein and leguminous crops and reduce the dependency of the dairy sector with regard to this strategic type of feed.
In addition, we need to reinforce the measures to support livestock farming in disadvantaged areas, including Luxembourg.
The Commission should take a cautious approach in its proposals on milk production, because 70% of the red meat produced in the EU comes from dairy cows.
In Europe, we have the strictest animal welfare and hygiene regulations in the world.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that the same requirements must apply to imported foods, in order to reduce the competitive disadvantage for our producers caused by unfair competition.
The livestock sector bears the consequences of stringent regulations required by our institutions, the most stringent in the world in terms of food safety and quality, the environment, animal health and welfare.
Unfortunately, the crisis in this sector is now having a negative effect leading to a significant loss in revenue for producers, to which we cannot be indifferent.
The very least that we should promise, and it is what producers rightly expect, is the reciprocity of these regulations on imports.
When, sooner or later, food safety is a matter of global concern, Europe must react to maintain the viability of livestock farming when it is under threat.
This investment in the future is vital.
This is why the economic impact of the regulations required, namely, legislation on animal welfare, must be assessed and incorporated into long-term planning for the future of the agricultural sector and the livestock sector in particular.
I am voting for this resolution because the increasing costs of the factors of production and the costs inherent in compliance with EU regulations are currently making the profitability of European livestock farming unviable: the prices obtained by some farmers for basic meat-based products are below production cost.
The European agricultural sector is sacrificed in favour of the possibility of the EU exporting other types of product to these countries from a great variety of economic sectors, but mainly from the livestock sector.
This resolution advocates measures that could end up helping to combat the crisis in this sector, which is being damaged by speculation on the commodities market, as well as by scrupulous compliance with EU regulation.
The crisis in the livestock sector is not only the result of rising production costs.
A modern society requires healthy food and high standards of hygiene and animal welfare which can be found in small-scale farming businesses and organic farms. These cause an increase in production costs and consumers then choose cheaper products.
While our domestic farmers are subject to strict regulations, it is difficult to monitor the standards which apply to cheap agricultural imports.
This is why we need fair prices and a change in the agricultural subsidy system.
We must move away from supporting multinational agribusinesses and large-scale hobby farmers like the Queen and instead support small farmers who can only survive by running their farms on a part-time basis alongside another job.
This report does not deal with this problem in sufficient detail and, therefore, I have abstained.
I happily voted today in favour of the resolution on the crisis in the EU livestock sector.
It called for vital measures to be taken to support the livestock sector in the European Union by focusing attention on the volatility of feed prices and adopting measures so that products imported into the EU meet the same requirements as those met by European goods.
The problem with the state of the livestock sector is prevalent across the whole EU.
The livestock sector is faced with the widest variety of challenges: rising feed prices, market speculation, increasing energy prices and growing expenditure associated with the enforcement of European regulations.
All of these factors have made production in Europe more expensive.
These difficulties apply across the board to all livestock farmers throughout the European Union.
However, there are additional difficulties on top of these, which some new Member States are facing, such as my country, Bulgaria, for instance.
In Bulgaria, only 10% of livestock farmers own their land, which consequently means that only these 10% can benefit from direct payments.
This situation is exacerbating the crisis in Bulgaria's livestock sector.
Due to the lack of funds to buy the quantities of feed needed for the winter, many Bulgarian farmers will be forced to slaughter their animals.
I voted in favour of the important resolution on the livestock sector in the hope of improving the lot of livestock farmers and the whole sector, which is in crisis due to strong speculation for a rise in animal feed prices.
My vote in favour is aimed at supporting all livestock farmers facing bankruptcy.
With this resolution, Parliament is calling on the European Union, pending adoption of the changes to the common agricultural policy, to release a small quantity of stored grain for animals in order to lower the costs for farmers, while curbing the current strong speculation and imposing tougher price controls to protect the agricultural market.
This motion for a resolution on the crisis in the European Union's livestock sector came out of the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats), and has involved several of my colleagues and me, personally. We are concerned that European producers in this sector are experiencing severe hardships and we are determined to take action in the hope of helping to overcome this difficult period.
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution, because it is a loud call for help for this sector, and because I am convinced that the action now started could make a real contribution to the sector's sustainability and development.
From this resolution, I would stress the call for the interests of European workers to be safeguarded in the context both of the post-2013 common agricultural policy and of bilateral negotiations, especially with Mercosur.
Of the advocated measures, I would stress: effective and flexible meat-market mechanisms; combating speculation on cereals and the creation of a safety net in this sector; adequate protection of farm workers in the most disadvantaged areas, and greater power for producer organisations.
I voted for this resolution because I think that it is a good idea to call attention to the crisis that the livestock sector is currently experiencing and its consequences.
I hope that the measures necessary to guarantee the sector's sustainability and development will actually be adopted.
The motion for a resolution on the crisis in the livestock sector which has been adopted by the European Parliament calls for the introduction of new market management mechanisms in the livestock industry and of safety nets in all the cereal sectors.
I oppose these market interventions.
However, the motion for a resolution also includes important liberal requirements for pragmatic thresholds for GMOs in imported feeds and a review of the ban on feeding meat and bone meal.
Therefore, I did not vote against the resolution, but instead abstained in the final vote.
In order to guarantee a supply of feed for the European livestock sector, we must relieve farmers of their burden of red tape and create a framework of legal certainty.
A market focus in the agricultural industry will also mean that farmers can take responsibility for their own businesses and need not expect constant protective interventions in the market to be made by politicians.
If agricultural policy is based only on individual interests, the result will be a spiral of exemptions which it will not be possible to finance and which will distort the market. This will turn farmers into the victims of a bureaucratic, state-run control system.
In order for the market to function effectively, we need a clearly defined framework for the entire agricultural industry and not just for individual areas.
This resolution on the livestock sector is yet another call by Parliament to take into account the growing difficulties faced by our European farmers.
With farmers having to comply with more and more rules on traceability, hygiene, animal welfare and respect for the environment, their production costs are now spiralling out of control: fuel, fertilisers and, above all, cereals, currently amount to 60% of the total cost.
We call on the Commission and on Commissioner Ciolo for more measures to curb price volatility and to create a safety net.
Our livestock farmers must survive the pressure of imports and work within a market where competition is fair.
As nobody pays to work, quite simply we want to enable them to make a living from their profession.
in writing. - As Greens, we have participated in negotiations on a joint resolution on this topic.
The result is not overwhelming, as other groups insisted on pointing to high environmental and animal welfare standards as the reason for lower competitiveness in the EU livestock sector.
They also would not agree to take climate change issues related to livestock production into consideration.
However, the resolution refers to the demands adopted in the Bov report and calls for measures to curb speculation and price volatility, as well as pointing out the key demand of the Husling report for a crop protein plan to reduce dependence on protein crop imports (mainly GM soy) and the specific needs of extensive grassland beef production.
Just as the foundations for the new common agricultural policy are being prepared, in the hope of keeping European agribusinesses competitive in comparison with those from third countries, which enjoy the undoubted advantages of more land and appreciably lower labour costs, a new threat has arisen for our livestock farmers in the form of a huge increase in the cost of animal feed linked to the rise in cereal prices.
The Commission needs to adopt measures to calm cereal prices to prevent the market from being affected by their excessive volatility.
I am not able to support the motion for a resolution because we do not need more aid for the agricultural sector.
Agricultural aid already accounts for nearly 40% of the total EU budget.
Furthermore, the motion for a resolution contains absolutely no criticism of the common agricultural policy, which really needs to be reduced before 2013, when the next multiannual financial framework is to be decided.
I abstained from the vote on the resolution.
The agricultural sector does not need any more subsidies.
It devours more than 40% of the total EU budget.
The resolution fails to take a critical view of the basis for the common agricultural policy system, which absolutely must reduce its share of expenditure ahead of the 2013 decision on a new long-term budget.
I kept an open mind during the reading of the initial motion for a resolution on the crisis currently faced by the EU livestock sector which, in particular, condemns the lack of transparency within the food supply chain turning producers and consumers into the weak links in the chain, the extreme market volatility faced by the EU dairy sector, in particular, and distortions of competition between EU producers and those from third countries subject to less demanding regulations on food quality and safety, and which reiterates the need for effective market regulation and for a strong budget for the common agricultural policy after 2013, However I ultimately condemn the adoption of this resolution and, in particular, Amendments 1, 2 and 3 which open up the way for genetically-modified soya and maize from third countries on European soil and a return to meat and bone meal in the food of non-ruminants where food safety cannot be guaranteed.
That is why I have taken on board my responsibilities in voting against this joint resolution as it goes against the precautionary principle, which should guide us all.
The livestock sector in the European Union is under serious threat, largely as a result of the recent increase in cereal prices.
The effect on livestock farming of speculation coming from the cereal sector is worrying.
It is not just market volatility associated with the economic crisis that we are experiencing, but there is also a serious threat of disturbance in all branches of the livestock sector, making the adoption of a series of genuine measures capable of combating the crisis that we are witnessing urgently required in order to prevent future negative developments.
As well as the necessary technical rules on food safety and animal welfare, it would be desirable if other improved measures capable of preventing the current situation developing into something more serious could be implemented, for example, the release of cereal stocks stored in intervention, in order to make it possible to minimise the issue of price volatility and prevent the delicate situation that we have been witnessing from getting worse.
Ladies and gentlemen, the food sector is one of the priority sectors both for Lithuania and the whole of the European Union.
We have already seen what can happen to energy supply and prices when the EU is dependent on imports.
This must not be repeated in the food sector.
Livestock holdings have faced a serious threat from the recent increase in cereal prices in the EU, as well as extreme climatic conditions and speculation.
This means that certain EU sectors, such as the pigmeat sector (an important branch of Lithuanian agriculture), have suffered a blow due to feed prices, which represent up to 60% of all production costs.
EU livestock production systems are important for maintaining livelihoods.
Lithuania may face serious consequences as a result of the crisis in the livestock sector.
The agricultural sector, which employs around 8% of our workers, is an important part of our economy.
Wheat and other grains are the principal areas of production.
In the EU-27, there are more than 130 million livestock units.
According to EU statistics, the number of livestock has fallen by 25% since 1990.
A further drop in the number of livestock in the EU may cause significant changes in production, which would upset the supply of food in the EU.
Such fluctuations may cause serious disturbances in the livestock sector.
I am against asking the Commission, as the Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe want to do, to reconsider the ban on the feeding of meat and bone meal derived from non-ruminants.
That ban needs to remain in place for two reasons.
First of all, the ban was not imposed for nothing; it was introduced to stop the BSE crisis.
We know that we would be taking a certain risk if we were to lift this ban.
I do not want that to happen.
I am much more in favour of food safety for consumers: not taking a risk when you do not know how big it is and what impact it could have.
Secondly, we have seen in recent years that viruses that occur in living animals can rapidly mutate.
If we were to lift the ban on the feeding of meat and bone meal derived from non-ruminants, we would risk encouraging this process of virus mutation.
We must not do that.
Corrections to votes and voting intentions: see Minutes
Decisions concerning certain documents: see Minutes
Written declarations included in the register (Rule 123): see Minutes
Forwarding of texts adopted during the sitting: see Minutes
Dates of forthcoming sittings: see Minutes
Adjournment of the session
Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday, 11 November 2010.
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting: see Minutes
Statements by the President
It was with great satisfaction that I received the news concerning the release from house arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader of the Burmese opposition.
Mrs Suu Kyi was one of the first winners of the Sakharov Prize, awarded by the European Parliament since 1988.
However, she was unable to collect it in person 20 years ago.
I would like to inform you that I have already sent Mrs Suu Kyi an invitation to visit the European Parliament and to address one of our plenary sessions.
25 November is the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women, as instituted by the UN 11 years ago.
Every day, all over the world, many women are victims of rape, humiliation and domestic violence.
A particular atrocity practised in many areas of the world is the circumcision of young women.
It is estimated that 8 000 girls fall victim to this every day.
To show solidarity with the campaign to stop this barbaric ritual, I would encourage you all to wear a rose petal today to symbolise our opposition to this practice.
I would also like to stress that the European Parliament has continued in its efforts to appeal for a complete stop to physical and mental violence against women for many years.
Composition of Parliament
The competent Spanish authorities have informed me that Mr Ramn Juregui Atondo has been replaced by Mrs Mara Irigoyen Prez with effect from 16 November 2010.
I would like to welcome our new fellow Member and issue a reminder that, on the basis of Rule 3(2) of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament, until such time as her credentials have been verified or a ruling has been given on any dispute, Mrs Irigoyen Prez shall take her seat in Parliament and on its bodies and shall enjoy all the rights pertaining thereto, provided that she has previously declared that she does not hold any office incompatible with that of Member of the European Parliament.
Composition of political groups
I would like to inform you that Mr Claudiu Ciprian Tnsescu joined the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament with effect from 15 November 2010.
I would also like to inform you that Mr Pino Arlacchi joined the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament with effect from 18 November 2010.
Signature of acts adopted under codecision
I hereby inform you that on Wednesday, the President of the Council and I will sign 14 legislative acts adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure pursuant to Rule 74 of Parliament's Rules of Procedure.
The titles of these legislative acts will be published in the minutes of the sitting.
They will be available to you, and you will be able to inspect them at any time.
Documents received: see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations: see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations (submission): see Minutes
Petitions: see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations: see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday, 18 November 2010 pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed.
The following amendments have been proposed:
Monday:
The political groups are proposing to remove the debate on Mr Berlinguer's report on civil, commercial, family and private international law aspects of the action plan implementing the Stockholm Programme from the agenda.
As a result, the report would be subject to a direct vote tomorrow, on Tuesday.
The report will stay. There will be a vote, but no debate.
I repeat: all the political groups have agreed to this solution and this solution has thus been accepted.
(Parliament agreed to the request)
Tuesday:
No amendments have been proposed.
(DE) Mr President, on the agenda for Tuesday, there are six reports by Mrs Matera concerning mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in the Netherlands.
I am taking the floor on this because I think that the way Mr Daul has been attacked on this matter in the Dutch press is not right.
At the Conference of Presidents, Mr Daul raised the question that had been discussed by the heads of the various groups concerning whether these reports should not be dropped in the light of the budget debate.
I would like to make two comments on this.
Firstly, we should leave these reports on the agenda.
We should also vote them through and transfer this money from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to the Netherlands.
Secondly, however, Mr Daul suggested it in a comment made at the Conference of Presidents.
If it is then taken from the Conference of Presidents into the public domain without him even being given an opportunity to answer questions and explain it himself, then, as the chair of a group, one has to consider very carefully what in fact one can say at the Conference of Presidents.
That is the first point.
My other point is that it is not the European Parliament that is claiming that money is being squandered here.
It is an element of the Dutch Government - not all of it - that is constantly claiming that money is being squandered in Europe and therefore Europe should get less money.
The Matera reports show that, on the contrary, money from this budget is being used very responsibly and - in my opinion - for very important projects in the Netherlands.
Consequently, adopting these reports would show that the criticism in the Netherlands in respect of this budget is not justified.
(Applause)
I am aware of the matter and I know what has appeared in the Dutch press.
However, I would like to assure you that the vote on mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for the Netherlands will proceed tomorrow as planned.
Nothing has changed. Voting will take place tomorrow.
Wednesday:
I have received a request from the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left concerning the debate on the situation in the Western Sahara, namely, that voting on the motions for a resolution on this matter should take place during this session and not the December session, as is currently intended.
(PT) Mr President, the situation in Western Sahara is serious enough for Parliament to hold off on taking a position on this matter.
The facts are undeniable and are plain to see.
We have seen images of destruction in the Sahrawi camps, and we know that this destruction has resulted in deaths and injuries, with many people still missing.
We know that a Member of this House was prevented from going to the camps and was expelled by the Moroccan authorities, and we know that the same thing has been happening with members of national parliaments, journalists and members of non-governmental organisations (NGOs).
Knowing all this, we cannot simply ignore it.
Not taking a position on this matter would now be an incomprehensible and unacceptable attitude of complacency, and even complicity, and it would only detract from the dignity of this institution and the values it claims to defend.
I would therefore like to call upon everyone to make the sensible decision of supporting the vote on a resolution on this issue during this sitting, voting in favour of this proposal.
Mr President, I think the arguments given by the GUE/NGL Group are absolutely relevant, important and necessary, so I will support this position.
Mr President, I must ask Mr Ferreira to pay attention for a moment.
We discussed this topic in great depth at the Conference of Presidents and during the preparations for the Conference of Presidents.
On behalf of my group, I would like to say that we are very concerned about what is going on in the Western Sahara.
If the pictures that we have seen are accurate, then this must give rise not just to serious debate, but also, if necessary, to consequences.
This means that we must proceed properly, however. Proceeding properly includes discussing the events this week.
At our request, the Moroccan foreign minister has now stated that he is prepared to attend a meeting of the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
He does not have to do that.
The Moroccan foreign minister does not have to appear before the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the European Parliament.
As far as I am concerned, we should take advantage of the fact that he is doing so in any case to first confront him with the reproaches made, and only then adopt a resolution.
I believe that is a much more proper way to proceed, rather than adopting a resolution now and then listening to what he has to say afterwards.
Let us adopt the resolution in the light of the information and the questions that we will have the opportunity to ask the Moroccan foreign minister in the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
I personally consider that a more proper way to proceed.
Moreover, until this afternoon there was consensus on that among all the groups.
The request has been supported by the majority, so in accordance with Mr Ferreira's proposal, voting will take place this week.
(Parliament agreed to the request)
I will give you the deadlines: the vote will take place on Thursday.
The deadlines are as follows: motions for resolutions must be tabled by 12:00 tomorrow, 23 November; amendments and joint motions for resolutions must be tabled by 12:00 on Wednesday, 24 November; amendments to joint motions for resolutions - by 13:00 on Wednesday, 24 November, in other words, an hour later.
I repeat: the vote will take place on Thursday.
(FR) Mr President, I would like to ask my fellow Members something.
There is an emergency situation in Tibet and concern about China's intention to impose the Chinese language on Tibet.
I believe that this is an issue that deserves a debate in plenary with Baroness Ashton present.
It is really the policy currently being enacted in Tibet that is problematic, quite apart from this emergency situation.
An emergency? Very well.
If the majority wants to tackle this issue from that perspective, that is fine.
For my part, and since the agenda is fairly clear in December, I would like us to hold a debate on this problem and on the European Union's policy regarding China with Baroness Ashton present, and to adopt a resolution on this matter.
I think that would be more intelligent.
Many thanks, Mr Cohn-Bendit.
This can also be proposed to the Conference of Presidents.
As a group chair, you may propose this at any time, Mr Cohn-Bendit.
Thank you for your comment.
Thursday:
No amendments have been proposed.
(The order of business was established)
ECB annual report for 2009 - Latest developments on international currency exchange rates (debate)
The next item is the joint debate on the following:
the report by Mr Balz, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the ECB annual report 2009, and
the Commission statement on the latest developments on international currency exchange rates.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we have just had a request for everyone to quieten down a bit.
Perhaps certain Members could comply with that request.
Ladies and gentlemen, my report today essentially concerns the performance of the European Central Bank in 2009 - in other words, during a period in which economic, financial and, increasingly, also political actions, were substantially dominated by the economic and financial crisis.
The crisis, which started off as a purely financial crisis, spread, and also affected the entire real economy in a second wave.
Economic activity diminished worldwide, while falling tax revenues and increasing welfare expenditure as a result of the crisis led to increasing public deficits.
Further measures to stimulate the economy also contributed to the level of debt.
As a result of these increased deficits, governments throughout the European Union passed extensive austerity packages.
In my opinion, these packages were necessary and, in some cases, even overdue.
However, they constrained the capacity of the governments to act.
Although economic activity began to recover in the second half of 2009, the financial and economic crisis then threatened to evolve into a public debt crisis in a third wave in 2010.
In my view, this danger has not yet been averted.
In recent days, we have been reminded all too clearly by the case of Ireland that the problem of over-indebtedness in the Member States has by no means been resolved, and I therefore also agree with President Van Rompuy: the failure of the euro is out of the question.
That is the current situation, however.
My report deals instead with 2009, about which we can say that the ECB reacted appropriately - even well, in fact - to the challenges.
Its measures proved to be widely successful and kept many financial institutions from collapse.
However, the financial institutions did not always pass on the liquidity in full to the real economy, with the result that the full recovery potential of these measures could not be exploited.
Since these measures involved extraordinary steps, it is now essential that the measures are lifted judiciously and with careful planning.
The problems in Greece and other euro countries may be, in part, home-made, but they also brought to light fundamental problems that existed within the economic and monetary union.
The principles of the Stability and Growth Pact were infringed.
We are now living through the consequences, and that includes what is going on in Ireland.
These infringements must now be removed and new infringements must be prevented.
The Stability and Growth Pact needs to be strengthened, and the economic and monetary union needs to be more in balance.
In the past, insufficient coordination of economic policies within the monetary union allowed considerable economic imbalances to arise between the euro area countries and left the euro area without a predefined crisis management mechanism.
The euro area will have to resolve these imbalances if it is to prevent a new crisis.
In the final event, however, the structural reform process - combined with the revision of the regulatory framework for financial policy - may strengthen the euro area.
The issue of the independence of the European Central Bank will also be a significant aspect of the new economic governance, particularly as regards the recently established European Systemic Risk Board.
Consequently, Parliament will continue to take its duty to review the performance of the ECB very seriously.
I am absolutely convinced that the European Union and the euro area will find a way out of this crisis and could emerge from it even stronger than before.
However, in the coming months, we need to learn the right lessons from what has happened.
This is a major challenge, but in its history to date, the European Union has constantly demonstrated that it develops best when it has to overcome challenges.
This crisis therefore also represents an opportunity that we should exploit.
In closing I would like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs from the other groups for their extremely pleasant and constructive cooperation on this report.
It is not something that can be taken for granted, but it deserves particular emphasis in this case.
Mr President, Mr Balz, ladies and gentlemen, I have the honour of presenting to you, as provided for by the treaty, the European Central Bank's Annual Report for 2009.
Due to the schedule having been somewhat thrown out by the European elections in particular, I spoke to you last March about the previous annual report.
This is therefore the second time I have addressed Parliament this year.
First of all, allow me to say how pleased I am about the support once again expressed by the European Parliament's motion for a resolution in favour of regular hearings before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and, more generally, in favour of maintaining close relations with the European Central Bank.
I welcome this even more since, this year, the European Parliament has demonstrated very convincingly its willingness and ability to assert the overriding European interest, especially with regard to the financial supervision package.
(DE) I would like to start by giving you a brief overview of the monetary policy measures taken by the European Central Bank during the financial and economic crisis.
Beyond the crisis period, I would also like to look back on the ECB over the first twelve years of its existence.
Finally, I would like to look at the most pressing challenges that await us in 2011.
Mr President, let me first mention the action taken during the crisis.
2009 was a most challenging year for the ECB's monetary policy.
It started with a severe economic downturn worldwide following the outbreak of the financial crisis in autumn 2008.
In this environment of subdued inflationary pressures, we continued with our policy of lowering our key rates further.
Overall, within a period of only seven months - between October 2008 and May 2009 - we lowered our main refinancing rate by 325 basis points. This brought our main refinancing rate to 1%.
To ensure that households and firms in the euro area would benefit from these most favourable financing conditions, in 2009 we also continued with - and even extended - our enhanced credit support to euro area banks.
We did this in response to dysfunctional money markets that had weakened the ability of monetary policy to influence the outlook for price stability by means of interest rate decisions alone.
Among those non-standard measures - as we used to call them - the most prominent is the full allotment liquidity provision through our refinancing operations with euro area banks against good collateral and at the main refinancing rate prevailing at the time for several maturities extending well beyond the weekly operations.
In 2009, we also extended the maturity of our longer-term refinancing operation to one year.
These were, of course, decisions of extreme importance.
As rightly emphasised in your draft resolution on the ECB's annual report, this enhanced credit support has been successful in avoiding what would have been - if additional dysfunctional tensions had been observed - a depression or a much deeper recession.
Let me emphasise that all our action was fully in line with our mandate to deliver price stability in the medium term for the euro area as a whole.
That we have been able to credibly deliver on our mandate is reflected in a favourable inflation outlook and well-anchored inflation expectations in the euro area.
Following some improvements in financial market conditions in the course of 2009, renewed market tensions erupted in a number of segments of the euro area bond market.
Since the smooth functioning of the bond market is essential to the transmission of the ECB's key interest rates, we decided to intervene in the euro area's debt security markets with the aim of helping restore a more normal transmission of monetary policy to the economy.
To this end, we introduced our Securities Markets Programme.
To ensure that this programme does not impact on our monetary policy stance, we re-absorb all the liquidity injected.
To sum up, let me emphasise that all the non-standard measures we have adopted during the period of acute financial stress are temporary in nature and were designed with exit considerations in mind.
Some of the non-standard measures initiated in 2009 and early 2010 have already been phased out in view of improvements in conditions in some financial markets and taking the ongoing recovery of the euro area economy into account.
Let me share with you for a moment a few thoughts on the track record of the euro.
In my view, three elements are fundamental.
Firstly, the ECB has delivered what it was expected to deliver according to its treaty mandate, namely, price stability.
Indeed, euro area average inflation over the past almost 12 years stands at 1.97%.
This fully reflects our definition of price stability, namely, our aim to keep annual inflation rates in the euro area below 2% and close to 2% in the medium term.
In this sense, the euro system over the past 12 years has operated as an anchor of stability and confidence and has done so during the most recent times, despite the challenging environment created by the global financial crisis.
Secondly - and reflecting favourably on the credibility of the ECB's monetary policy - inflation expectations have, as I have said, remained solidly anchored at levels in line with price stability.
Thirdly, this success is grounded, we trust, in the full independence of the ECB from political influence, in its primary mandate to maintain price stability and in its transparent communication, particularly concerning the definition of price stability.
The ECB's two-pillar monetary strategy allows for a forward looking and medium-term oriented course of action that is underpinned by a solid analytical framework.
That framework includes a thorough analysis of monetary and credit developments, taking the monetary nature of inflation over the medium to longer term into account.
We consider that this comprehensive approach allows for well-informed and consistent decision making, whilst being steady and looking beyond short-term volatility.
As regards the external dimension of the euro, let me only say that our currency has established itself internationally.
In 2009, the euro represented around 30% of the stock of international debt securities and the stock of global foreign exchange reserves.
Speaking of the external dimension of the euro, I will say a word on the present foreign exchange rate issues, domains where I would call for great prudence.
There are two major topics.
One is the relationship between the major floating convertible currencies of the industrialised countries, such as the dollar, the euro, the yen, the pound sterling and the Canadian dollar.
These currencies have been floating since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system at the beginning of the 1970s.
I should underline the strong view of the international community that excess volatility and disorderly movements in exchange rates have adverse implications for economic and financial stability.
Let me say that the ECB appreciates the recent statements by the US authorities, namely the Secretary of the US Treasury and the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, reiterating that a strong dollar vis--vis the other major convertible currencies is in the interests of the United States.
I share this view entirely.
A dollar that is credible among the major currencies of the advanced economies is in the interests of the United States, of Europe and of the entire international community.
The second topic concerns the currencies of emerging market economies which have current account surpluses and exchange rates that are not sufficiently flexible.
On this issue, the international community agrees - and this was restated in Korea last week, as well as by the Commission - that moving towards more market-determined exchange rate systems, enhancing exchange rate stability to reflect underlying fundamentals and refraining from competitive devaluation of currencies are in the interest of the emerging economies concerned and of the international community.
The ECB used to say that this is no time for complacency.
This is truer now than ever.
The challenges lying ahead of us are manifold.
All relevant authorities as well as the private sector must assume fully their responsibilities, and this is true for executive branches, central banks, regulators, supervisors, the private sector and the financial industry.
In particular, the current crisis has clearly demonstrated that implementing ambitious reforms in economic governance is in the interest both of the euro area countries and of the euro area as a whole.
The proposals put forward by President Van Rompuy on the reform of the EU's economic governance and approved by the European Council meeting of October 2010 represent an improvement to the current surveillance framework at EU level and seem broadly appropriate for the EU countries not participating in monetary union.
However, as regards the specific requirements of the euro area, in our opinion, they fall short of what we view as necessary to ensure the best possible functioning of the single-currency economy.
I am convinced that, over the coming months, the European Parliament will help Europe make the necessary quantum leap in economic governance a reality.
With its legislative role concerning financial supervision and the ESRB, Parliament has shown its determination when it comes to major issues.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for this and to express again my conviction that the influence of Parliament will be decisive in the economic governance debate.
Another important challenge relates to financial regulation.
We should take full advantage of the lessons of the crisis and maintain the momentum for financial reform.
As advocated in your draft resolution, a speedy implementation of Basel III is of crucial importance.
The Commission's legislative proposals on short selling and over-the-counter derivatives are also indispensable to making the financial system more transparent and resilient.
We are facing a decisive year.
2011 should see the adoption of the revised governance framework, in-depth discussions on the crisis management framework and possibly the launch of the procedure for a treaty change.
We need to get all these reforms right, so as to ensure that Europe as a whole and the euro area can meet future challenges with even greater capacity and conviction.
2011 will be also the first year of the existence of the European Systemic Risk Board.
As is called for in your draft resolution, we are doing our utmost to support the new body.
At the same time, of course, the complete independence and the primary mandate of the ECB, enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty, are unchanged, and I have already stressed this point before Parliament.
We will continue to deliver on our mandate.
This is what the treaty requires from us.
You can trust that we will deliver what our fellow citizens expect.
Member of the Commission. - Mr President, let me first thank the rapporteur, Burkhard Balz, for the solid and comprehensive report on the ECB annual report 2009.
The Commission welcomes the report, which reflects the key issues appropriately.
The report recognises and praises the work done by the ECB in managing the crisis.
The Commission shares this view; the ECB, under the leadership of President Jean-Claude Trichet, has navigated in this difficult situation skilfully and with a steady hand.
I want to use this opportunity to thank Jean-Claude Trichet for an excellent cooperation and especially for his crucial role during these turbulent times.
The ECB has, both through its monitoring stance and its non-standard measures, been instrumental in the fire-fighting to overcome the crisis and thus in laying the foundations for sustainable growth and job creation.
Your report rightly stresses that the financial crisis has exposed the need for reinforced economic surveillance in the euro area.
The Commission agrees with this, which is precisely why we have put forward several legislative proposals to reinforce economic governance in the EU, especially in the euro area.
We have also taken on board several suggestions presented in the Feio report to strengthen and broaden economic governance in the Union.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has received the Commission's proposals and is currently working towards achieving the ambitious deadline of June next year, which I appreciate and welcome.
Let me now turn to the second part of the debate, which is the latest developments in the international exchange rates.
It is correct that volatility in foreign exchange markets has increased in recent weeks, with significant shifts in the value of major bilateral exchange rates.
The euro appreciated against the dollar since June this year due to stronger data for the euro area economy and due to further expansion of the US monetary policy.
More recently, however, the euro has somewhat weakened against most currencies, as increased worries about the Member States' public finances - above all in Ireland - have affected the euro.
In real effective terms, the euro is currently close to its long-term average following an overall depreciation this year from an overvalued level at the end of last year.
Compared to the beginning of the year, the euro depreciation in real effective terms amounts to around 7%.
In the context of a slow recovery in advanced economies and large capital flows to emerging economies, many countries have aimed at weakening their currency or at least resorting to competitive non-appreciation.
It is therefore important that leaders in the G20 Seoul Summit last week very clearly and strongly committed themselves to abstain from competitive devaluations of their currencies.
The G20 summit also agreed to work further on the rebalancing of global growth.
An agreement had been reached to work on indicative guidelines.
It is clear that exchange rate flexibility must play a role in the necessary rebalancing so that exchange rates reflect economic fundamentals, as was underlined by President Trichet.
The Commission will continue to support this important strand of G20 work, which will also be one of the key focuses of the French G20 Presidency next year.
Finally, I need to inform you about an important development concerning the euro area.
Yesterday, when the ECOFIN Council welcomed the request of the Irish Government for financial assistance from the EU, ministers concurred with the Commission and the ECB that providing assistance to Ireland is warranted to safeguard financial stability in Europe.
EU financial support can be provided under a programme with a rigorous policy conditionality which is being negotiated currently with the Irish authorities by the Commission and the IMF, in liaison with the ECB.
The programme will address the fiscal challenges of the Irish economy in a decisive manner and the programme will also include a fund for potential future capital needs of the banking sector.
To redress stress in the banking sector, a comprehensive range of measures including deleveraging and restructuring will need to be taken to contribute to ensuring that the Irish banking system performs its role properly in the functioning of the overall economy.
The technical talks on an EU-IMF programme are now well under way and the negotiations can be concluded by the end of November.
Apart from EU and IMF financing, I can inform you that the United Kingdom and Sweden have indicated that they stand ready to contribute to the programme through bilateral loans, which is welcome.
All in all, yesterday's decisions are a critical step forward in the joint efforts to stabilise the Irish economy and thus safeguard financial stability in Europe.
Mr President, Mr Trichet, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, clearly, I join the chorus of praise for the ECB's work, and I shall not repeat what my colleague, Mr Balz, said or what is said in the resolution.
In the short time allotted to me, I would simply like to say that we must consider our fellow citizens.
Why do I say that in this way today?
Because, yesterday evening, on all the French television channels, a future presidential candidate made a spectacle of himself by tearing up a EUR 10 note that he had photocopied and enlarged, and showing that, by tearing up that note, he was tearing up the cause of all our ills.
Of course, that is not true.
All that is needed is for us to make an effort, together, to communicate.
The work that has been carried out in terms of supervision, organisation and regulation, to which you have referred, Mr President, is excellent.
You know you have Parliament's support: you said so yourself.
However, we have a real task on our hands with regard to those of our fellow citizens who do not understand the messages that are being conveyed.
Every day, the headlines in the press are of increasingly grim solutions and unlikely situations, and I can tell you that, on Friday, when I was out in the field, as we say in politics, I saw nearly 100 to 150 people.
They all asked me the same question: what is going to happen with the euro?
The fear felt by our fellow citizens is out of sync with what is being done, and done well, by the European Central Bank.
Mr President, first of all, I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mr Balz, for his cooperation.
I also welcome the fact that the European Central Bank has been granted the status of an EU institution following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon.
Secondly, I would like to point out that there are considerable macro-economic disparities between the economies in the euro area, highlighting the need for closer harmonisation between economic and monetary policies.
The Growth and Stability Pact is not an adequate instrument for resolving the current economic imbalances.
One solution out of this deadlock could be to issue government bonds at EU level.
This solidarity mechanism would provide stable financing for Member States in dire straits, would make budgetary supervision more effective and would significantly improve liquidity.
The single currency should be supplemented with fiscal tightening and joint long-term debt.
The reckless behaviour of financial operators helped trigger the economic and financial crisis.
In addition to this, the recent speculative attacks against certain Member States have made it difficult for the latter to borrow money on the international financial markets, thereby virtually affecting the stability of the whole euro area.
I therefore think that a permanent mechanism is required to protect the euro area against speculative attacks.
It is the European Commission's duty to monitor the activity of current credit rating agencies and to devise a structure for an EU-level credit rating agency.
We must also bear in mind that the austerity measures adopted by national governments could significantly reduce the chance of the European economy's recovery.
This is why an EU-level economic governance model is required which will combine fiscal consolidation with the creation of new jobs.
The Commission must also propose specific targets for narrowing the competitiveness gap between EU economies and, last but not least, go ahead with investments in green energy.
Mr President, Commissioner, first of all, I join the chorus of praise for our rapporteur, who I think has outlined the issue very clearly.
In his report, he stresses the innovations afforded by the Treaty of Lisbon, and I really want to thank you, Mr Trichet, for having once again this evening reminded those of us who seem to be unaware of the fact - including, incidentally, those who signed it and had it ratified - that the Treaty of Lisbon includes a major innovation: we are going to be able to debate publicly, in this Chamber, the reform of the Stability Pact.
Under Mr Rehn, the Commission has drawn up a set of proposals that are on the right track and are rather courageous, especially in calling for discipline to be strengthened by taking account of the macro-economic imbalances that Mr Balz had, in fact, mentioned in his report.
What is more, you refer several times, Mr Trichet, to a 'quantum leap', in other words, a real step forward in this governance.
I agree entirely with what Mr Gauzs said; when one goes out into the field, one almost wonders whether the proposals put forward by the Commission in September are completely relevant, whether account ought not to be taken of the crisis that is currently occurring in order to allow for as much progress as possible to be made.
I would like to point out here that those who designed the euro never thought that we would simply coordinate economic policies in the long term.
What was envisaged was political union, namely, an ability to take decisions while being supervised by Parliament.
For my part, what I find rather striking, when we speak to the citizens, is that we ultimately have motorists - the Member States - who are, at the same time, behind the wheel and by the side of the road acting as policemen.
That is rather how the current system works; in other words, we are, at the same time, the driver, the person who issues fines and the person who is supposed to supervise the other cars.
I do not think that there is a single country with road traffic like that.
We would therefore like to raise the cost of fines a little and we shall work towards that.
Thank you for having reminded us that we have already done so in practice with regard to the reform of financial supervision, in the general European interest.
Mr President, firstly, on behalf of my group, may I express my thanks to Mr Balz for the cooperative manner in which our deliberations were conducted.
We were able to contribute certain suggestions to make the report even more balanced.
The period 2009-2010 was characterised by extraordinary measures on the part of the European Central Bank, and in view of these extraordinary economic developments, I would like to thank Mr Trichet once again for taking these measures, particularly since they were not always well received within his own institution.
We have seen during this period that the Stability and Growth Pact is inadequate.
Instead, we need effective coordination of economic policy that takes into account not just public debt but also private debt, and that deals with economic imbalances not just in deficit countries but also in countries making a surplus.
Where prices are concerned we need to focus not just on consumer prices, but also on property prices, their speculative development and the creation of bubbles.
Above all - and we are constantly urging this - we need once and for all a framework for tax competition in the European Union.
It is unacceptable to have huge austerity programmes on the expenditure side while countries continue to have unconstrained tax competition on the revenue side.
In particular, it is unacceptable - and impossible to explain to our citizens - that in such a situation as we now have, we are rescuing Ireland's banks, but not at the same time ensuring that its scandalously low rate of corporation tax, which stands at 12.5%, is corrected to the usual European rate of 25%.
We need to have some straight talking here.
I would also like to ask Mr Trichet to comment on two matters in the report: the issue of transparency, as mentioned in paragraph 21, and the issue of the security accepted, as mentioned in paragraph 39.
You have not yet commented on these issues.
On behalf of all the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs, I would be grateful if you could comment specifically on these matters.
on behalf of the ECR Group. - Mr President, I would like to congratulate Mr Balz on his report.
However, at a time when the euro is facing new crises every day and it is generally accepted that new forms of governance and new rules are required for survival, it is hard for the ECB to weigh in on outside global issues.
Yet that could be precisely the problem.
Until now, most of the large global players have succeeded in working together to seek solutions to the problems of the global financial crisis.
The coordination in areas of financial services regulatory reform, particularly in areas like derivatives, has been unprecedented.
But when it is national currencies that are being defended as opposed to multinational banks, there is a strong danger that multilateral coordination is going to break down.
If the ECB looks to protect the euro above all else, the Fed to protect the dollar and the Chinese the yuan, we will all lose out.
Since its inception, the ECB has done the difficult job of balancing different cultures and methods of monetary policy.
I hope that, even while it is under intense internal pressure, it can use its expertise in these areas to enhance cooperation beyond the EU to a global level.
Madam President, I would first like to express my heartfelt thanks to Mr Balz for such constructive cooperation.
I can only emphasise the fact that despite coming from different positions, working together was a positive experience.
Many people thought - and I would like to underline this fact again here - that the crisis in the euro area was over.
Ireland shows that this is not the case.
Just as before, Europe is voluntarily offering itself up to the financial markets.
The EU Member States are still having to offer their treasury bonds in the bazaar of the financial markets and try to gain the confidence of the speculators by adopting suicidal austerity packages.
At the weekend, we saw once again where that leads us.
This time it was not the Greeks, who were supposedly out to deceive everyone, but rather Ireland - the star pupil - that was forced to turn to the European bail-out fund in order to rescue its banking system - a system which had also long been held up as a shining example of deregulation.
In the meantime, the financial sector is already eyeing up Portugal for capitulation as its interest rates continue to rise.
The European Central Bank must share the responsibility for this drama.
It has failed and continues to fail to use eurobonds in order to offer a civilised alternative to this casino approach.
While half of Europe is recovering from the crisis, the ECB idly stands by as the remaining part falls further and further into poverty and uncertainty.
Ruinous cuts across the board by national economies may be to the taste of the European investment and banking giants, but they do nothing to help either Ireland or the monetary union and the ECB.
Please pay no attention to Mrs Merkel's simplified financial ABC, Mr Trichet.
If you want to save the economic and monetary union, do not leave European treasury bonds hanging in the air.
Introduce eurobonds before the speculators claim their next victim.
(The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149(8))
(DE) Madam President, I wanted to ask Mr Klute how his proposal for Europe-wide treasury bonds and eurobonds can be reconciled with the attitude of the German Federal Constitutional Court on such matters, and what he thinks the outcome would be were such a measure to be brought before the German Federal Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe.
(DE) Madam President, I admit that that is difficult to assess.
I cannot give an off-the-cuff answer to that right now.
Undoubtedly, it is a tricky situation, but I think that things have now developed so far that a rethink might possibly take place.
I am sorry, but I cannot give an off-the-cuff answer to that question.
on behalf of the EFD Group. - Madam President, I read the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs' report on the European Central Bank's annual report with great interest.
The report acknowledges that huge disparities between Member States of the eurozone contributed to the problems we are witnessing.
The report states that 'these imbalances pose considerable difficulties for a suitable monetary policy within the eurozone' and reiterates that 'the financial crisis in some countries within the euro area is a serious matter for the area as a whole', reflecting this 'dysfunction of the euro area'.
I strain to see the sense in calling for stronger coordination of economic policies within the euro area.
The knee-jerk reaction has been to increase economic governance, but it is limitations of enforced commonality that have led particular Member States into financial crisis, combined with extraneous reasons as yet beyond our control.
Perhaps the system does not allow for the necessary economic elasticity and self-determination to enable governments to deal with idiosyncratic problems effectively, such as rates of inflation.
The report lights upon this point, noting that the crisis and subsequent bail-outs and stimulus packages 'led to far-reaching austerity measures which ... heavily constrain the capacity of governments to act'.
One argument is that you cannot have a single currency without further homogenisation to iron out differences between Member States and levels of wealth.
Yet any realist knows that this will not happen.
It is contrary to human nature, which logically should shine forth in a democracy, however inconvenient.
Is the eurozone ready for Estonia in January?
I raise my eyebrows at the statement that 'the adoption of the currency by Estonia shows the status of the euro', suggesting that this will 'encourage (other) Member States to seek membership'.
Ideological clinging to the euro will see monetary problems resurface in boom time and bust.
A single currency only works in a tight-knit federal environment.
Perhaps, with this being the Commission's ultimate intention, they have put the cart before the horse.
Although the UK is not in the eurozone, we suffer the effects of contributing to bail-outs and through the intricately entwined economics inside the Union, it is no use waiting for the 'I told you so' moment.
It has already passed.
(DE) Madam President, it would be good if this report by Mr Balz could be presented subject to a reservation, and that would be a reservation as regards memoirs.
I think we might learn a lot more if you would present the chapter on the years 2008-2009 from your point of view, Mr Trichet.
In the absence of such knowledge, we are working somewhat in the dark here, and there is reason to believe that there are many extraneous circumstances of which we are unaware at the present time.
Nevertheless, you have stated that the longer-term financing measures have been extended once again, Mr Trichet.
Perhaps that is a good thing.
History will show us whether it was really such a good idea.
We do not always have to point the finger straight away at Alan Greenspan.
There is just something that I am concerned about, and that is that our citizens are simply not being told what this liquidity aid is actually being used for, and the lack of transparency as regards the way that the Irish are being forced - in many people's eyes - under this umbrella.
We know that Ireland has already received EUR 130 billion, EUR 35 billion of which has gone to the subsidiary of a German business - Hyporealestate.
Just why is so much pressure being piled on at present?
Why are we not in a position to say who the real creditors of the Irish banks are?
Is it my life assurance with Allianz?
Is it, in fact, the German banks, as is always being claimed?
If that is the case, are we not having the wrong debate here?
In which case, we should be honest enough to tell our citizens that it is they that we are bailing out, that it may be your own money that you made the mistake of investing in Ireland, in a banking world built on false foundations.
This, of course, also raises the question of whether every Irish bank is really essential to the system.
Why do we not have the courage to accept that one or other will fail?
The Leman Brothers solution cannot always be the answer.
We need the risks to be distributed fairly, because a large proportion of the earlier gains undoubtedly went into the private sector.
(HU) Madam President, first of all, I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on the splendid job he has done.
Since the European Parliament is the primary institution through which the European Central Bank is accountable to European citizens, I am very pleased about President Trichet's participation in this plenary, and also that he regularly engages in monetary discussion with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs.
The financial economy is global in nature.
The crisis, too, is global.
It is precisely for this reason that the solutions to the crisis must also be global.
We cannot ignore the fact that the Member States' economic and financial problems still affect the euro in all its aspects.
I once again agree with the rapporteur.
Unfortunately, the EMU has not complied with nor held Member States accountable for compliance with all the principles of the Stability and Growth Pact.
This is why we speak of government debt growth, and this is why we now see a new wave of the crisis, which is a government debt crisis.
I trust that the issues regarding the ECB's independence and its responsibility for decision making will be resolved in a reassuring manner, and that this, along with the reform programme aimed at creating a successful economic union, will help strengthen the European Union and the euro area within it.
I am sure that we are able to learn from the crisis and from our mistakes, and that the crisis will create opportunities for us.
(FR) Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, the euro is experiencing problems, but what convertible currency is not after the systemic crisis caused by crazy finance?
Government debt is a serious problem.
Nevertheless, the increase in public deficits is a result of the public bail-out of private banks.
What is more, the economy needed to be revived.
The financial crisis has spread rapidly to the real economy, leading to a sharp downturn and unemployment.
It appears that the world of crazy finance has not learnt from the crisis.
Wall Street and City survivors are speculating on the currency markets and short selling CDSs that they do not even have.
The lending rates for States it is suspected may default must be raised by indirectly imposing austerity policies on them, which will make it even more difficult for them to recover.
European solidarity is being shown with difficulty and sparingly.
The bail-out of Greece means, first and foremost, the bail-out of French and German banks holding a significant portfolio of Greek debts.
The support given to Ireland is, above all, a bail-out of British and German banks that would suffer deeply if Irish banks were to go under.
The fact that the rate of the euro remains volatile is not a sign that the common currency is weak.
It is a reflection of the tension in the markets, especially in the face of a currency war between the Americans and the Chinese.
Since the start of the year, China has no longer been borrowing in dollars, but has been selling them.
The tax situation in the United States is worse than that in Europe.
On top of federal public deficits, there are enormous private deficits.
Forty-eight of the 50 states in the American Union have a deficit budget.
Mr Van Rompuy spoke about the euro struggling to survive.
He is wrong.
The euro, that beacon of stability that Mr Trichet has just spoken about, will outlive Mr Van Rompuy, because the Union and its supporting structure, the Euro Group, are the most important economic unit in the world.
In spite of real problems, to which Europe is responding with continual shilly-shallying, it should be pointed out that, at world level, the 27 are the biggest exporters of goods, the biggest importers of goods, and the biggest exporters of services.
We have the most solvent internal market in the world.
Furthermore, European companies export twice as much within the internal market as they do to world markets.
The Union is the main destination for third-country direct investments.
Companies in the Union hold the biggest investment stocks worldwide.
With 500 million citizens, or 7% of the world's population, the Union generates 30% of gross world product.
The United States generates 25%, Japan 8% and China 8% of world product.
Our European Union, which also provides 55% of world development aid, could have more of an influence if our leaders had a little more political courage, if they used Europe's strength.
I will just end by saying that a strict and transparent framework must be imposed on international finance.
We must work together to overcome our problems.
Madam President, as has been highlighted by our colleague Mr Gauzs, some people hate the euro; they see it as the root of all evil and they cheer at the prospect of the collapse of the eurozone. But these people are wrong and they live in the past.
The current troubles are not caused by the euro; on the contrary, the euro protects us from even worse.
We need the common currency but we also need proper governance of the eurozone; loose cooperation on the basis of unanimity is not an option anymore.
Colleagues, we are on a ship with a giant hole in its side; it is sink or swim at this moment.
But national governments still seem to think that it is enough to set up task forces and working groups and talk about maybe seeking closer cooperation, and then again maybe not.
The good news is that they seem to be acting more decisively and more quickly in the case of Ireland, because swift action is needed and very welcome.
This is not just about rescuing single countries: it is about the credibility of the eurozone.
It is about the world testing us.
Are we willing and able to act?
The confidence of the world in the eurozone is essential for the stability of our currency; the money in our pockets depends on the confidence that others have in us.
So I therefore urge national politicians to stop playing the populist card, or indeed publicly tearing up euro notes, and instead take ownership and take responsibility for our shared currency.
Finally, a word about the austerity measures.
They are much criticised, and some people even say that they will damage the economy.
Of course we have to act with caution, but these measures are necessary to sanitise public finance in the long term and are also a sign of solidarity between countries in the eurozone.
I think we should talk not only about the expenditure side but also about the revenue side, because there too, reforms - whether of the labour market, pensions or social security - are necessary and long overdue.
(NL) Madam President, the European Central Bank has not known a year as eventful as 2009 since the euro was introduced.
Tackling the crisis has cost a great deal of effort and this is still continuing.
I think that we should have a better and stronger approach to tackling the crisis.
The establishment of the European Emergency Fund is no structural solution.
We will still have huge debts which countries like Greece or Ireland will never be able to repay.
What really helps, however, are stringent, strict budgetary discipline and the accompanying automatic penalties.
Fortunately, Mr Balz's report is very clear on that point.
The Council should take the same approach in adapting the Stability and Growth Pact.
Cutbacks are needed if we are to overcome the crisis.
The majority of this House should also apply that principle to the European budget.
The acceptance of the 2.9% budget increase is a very broad compromise already.
No citizen will understand Parliament wanting still more and wanting further compromises.
Therefore, do not do it!
(SK) Madam President, according to the minutes of the negotiations held between euro area finance ministers from the beginning of September this year, published by the Reuters press agency, you apparently stated, Mr Trichet, that if you had known that Slovakia would not agree to provide voluntary financial assistance to the Greek Government, you would never have agreed to Slovakia being accepted into the euro area.
The project in question had the aim of protecting large financial institutions from extensive losses arising from Greece's inability to pay its debts, and, as far as I remember, you explicitly referred to it as a manifestation of voluntary solidarity.
Perhaps, Mr President, in your daily dealings involving billions of euro, it has escaped your attention that the amount of money you receive each month for performing your role is enough to cover the monthly living expenses of almost 100 families in my country.
Mr Trichet, if you really think that these families living on EUR 600 to 700 a month, or pensioners living on EUR 300 a month, should further reduce their daily food consumption only so that your colleagues from the banks and financial funds can keep their profits, pay out high bonuses and indulge themselves in ever greater amounts of caviar, then please do not call that solidarity.
I know that the situation in Europe is very complex, but Slovakia is definitely not a country that you are in any position to criticise.
(PT) Madam President, the intervention in Ireland ultimately proves that the EU should have come up with a common solution for European banks, particularly the large banks, almost before dealing with any other matter.
In practice, today we are openly discussing the failure of states, yet we still do not have a clear proposal for a solution for European banks.
The intervention in Greece and the way it has developed prove that Europe needs European solutions, and the solution identified thus far is principally based on bilateral aid, whereby every country is subjected to the judgment of its partners based on criteria that are neither clear nor stable.
The European Central Bank (ECB) has acted as an anchor in this situation, filling some of the gaps, particularly in terms of the vulnerability of sovereign debt.
Make no mistake, however: we cannot continue like this in the medium term.
I would therefore like to ask the President of the ECB the following three questions.
Firstly, what is the ECB's position on a stable model for constructing a true system of solidarity between the Member States with regard to sovereign debt?
We need this, and we should not refuse to face up to reality.
Secondly, what were the differences, if it is possible for us to identify them, which prompted the ECB not to endorse all the recommendations of the report compiled by the task force led by Mr Van Rompuy?
Thirdly, does the ECB believe that the EU can survive with the increasing divergence of growth suffered by the Member States, and without a common instrument that restores some convergence in these growth strategies?
(GA) Madam President, as a Member for Ireland, I cannot say that I am too proud of what is currently happening in my own country.
However, I am sure that most of our citizens want to do whatever needs doing in order to make things right.
And to put things right in Ireland, two things are necessary.
Firstly, unfortunately we have had to turn to the support from the ECB and the IMF in the short term.
Secondly, and more importantly, the supervisory architecture of the authorities in Europe needs to work effectively so that the cosy relationship between dodgy banks, sleepy regulators and weak governments does not happen again in the future.
Thirdly, I just want to ask people to lay off a little with regard to corporation tax because, firstly, it is a matter of subsidiarity; secondly, other countries in the EU have similar rates; and thirdly, it would exacerbate a very difficult situation in Ireland at the moment.
(GA) So, I know that the people of Ireland are eager to get on with the job and that things will improve in due course.
Madam President, Commissioner Rehn and Mr Trichet have given us more information here this evening than the Irish Government, which has misled us and lied to us for months.
They have been more concerned to defend their historical legacy than to defend the future of our people's livelihoods, and indeed Ireland's and Europe's currency.
My appeal to Commissioner Rehn and Mr Trichet tonight is that they ensure that the timeframe for aid and the targets for deficits and debt are such that the social objectives of Europe are taken into account, as well as the need to ensure that Ireland's capacity to grow its economy and create jobs is not undermined.
Will you confirm also that you fully understand that increasing Ireland's 12.5% corporation profits tax is not a solution to Ireland's crisis, nor indeed Europe's current crisis, but could, in fact, create an economic and jobs wasteland in Ireland?
(SV) Madam President, I would like to thank Mr Trichet and Mr Rehn very much for their absolutely excellent work in these turbulent times.
I have a very specific question for you both.
Back in my country, which does not belong to the euro area, there is currently a discussion taking place along these lines: 'This demonstrates precisely what we said when voting against the euro in 2001.
It shows that we were right - the euro cannot work'.
This is, of course, an erroneous claim.
I will therefore ask you two gentlemen a question.
I believe that it is a key question and a key responsibility for the two of you to explain why Europe and the euro area have ended up in these difficulties.
Is it because the euro area and the common currency have problems?
Or is it because we have a number of politicians in the individual countries, in other words, in countries such as Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Greece, who have not actually done their job?
Gentlemen, you need to explain this. Otherwise, I will never be able to explain it back home in my country.
Madam President, I would like to put a question to Mr Trichet.
As President of the European Central Bank, why have you and the European Commission utterly capitulated to the speculators and assorted sharks on the international financial markets?
You allowed them to engineer a panic in the markets over the Irish crisis - a panic designed to get you to intervene to guarantee the bond holders the billions that they gambled in bad debts.
Because they threatened you that they would attack Portugal and Spain next, you and Commissioner Rehn utterly capitulated to a market dictatorship that is unelected, faceless and unaccountable.
Can I ask you to justify this?
Private speculators and bondholders gamble tens of billions in private deals with private developers and private bankers in Ireland for private profit, and when the gamble fails, you support the pathetic government in Ireland to saddle working people, pensioners and the poor with the cost of this gamble.
Now you have sent in the IMF as the shock troops for neoliberal capitalism to make the Irish people pay.
Morally, and in every other way, they should not pay and they must resist this disastrous attack on their services, living standards and democracy.
Madam President, my constituents in London simply cannot afford the GBP 288 estimated per family as their part of the contribution to the seven billion bail-out of Ireland.
The Irish are the authors of their own misfortune: their government mismanaged their economy and fuelled a house-building boom unrelated to reality.
But worst of all, they joined the European single currency.
The first step in solving their problems is to leave the euro; instead, Ireland has chosen to subject itself to financial governance from the European Union.
The longer it takes to leave the euro, the worse the consequences of the exit will be.
The same applies, of course, to Portugal, Italy, Spain and Greece and, no doubt, others.
The only sensible thing that the late and unlamented Labour government did was to keep Britain out of the euro.
A sensible thing that the coalition government can do is to stop throwing good money after bad.
Madam President, Mr Batten is right.
The Irish Government horribly mismanaged our country, and it is a sad day for the Irish people that we are mentioned in this Chamber in these particular circumstances.
But we are in a situation where we need solidarity.
Perhaps Mr Batten does not understand that word, or that Ireland needs England as much as England needs Ireland and its economy.
We are all very much interlinked: let us not forget that.
Can I just ask some questions?
Because in these emotional times, we need some cool heads and clear information.
Where stand the bank stress tests this evening, when the Irish banks appear to be absolutely overstretched and stressed out?
Secondly, there is a question for the ECB to answer about what its mandate is.
I think that was inferred in the opening remarks, because there are interlinked relationships between all banks.
Those banks from Germany and France and other countries who invested in Irish banks need to look at what they did and why they did it.
Lastly, there is political instability this evening in Ireland.
It is regrettable, but it is necessary that we have a general election.
(FI) Madam President, Robert Schuman, founder of the EU, said that the European Union would develop through a series of crises, and that development may now well be rapid, because there are quite a lot of crises around.
This poses an enormous challenge to the political system in the European Union and the Member States.
It has to be said that Ireland's problems are partly due to the fact that the country has a weak government.
The political establishment now has to be careful that the cure is not worse than the disease.
For example, the representative of the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance said here that the corporate income tax rate in Ireland should be raised to the European level, but that might actually be a death blow to Ireland, its growth and employment.
The idea is to get the money back, in the form of growth and employment for Ireland, and not to punish the country.
We need to help Ireland, not punish it.
(DE) Madam President, Mr Trichet, we all know that the main task of the European Central Bank is to ensure monetary stability and that you can best achieve this aim by being politically independent.
We have always supported you in this.
The crises of the last two years have shown that you have a further task, and that is to ensure the stability of the financial markets and of the financial system.
This task, too, you have performed very professionally and convincingly.
However, to do so, you have had to accept being yoked together with the governments concerned.
In other words, you were not able to act with complete political independence here; instead, you had to work together with the governments.
I would be interested to know how exactly you would like to arrange this role in the future to ensure firstly, that you are independent, and secondly, that you can continue to perform this task properly without governments exploiting this opportunity to in fact undermine your independence.
(PT) Madam President, the imbalances and disparities between economies in the euro area are being exacerbated, in spite of all the promises and proposals, and the question that arises is this: do you not think that it is time to review policies?
Do you not see that insisting that countries with such weak economies adhere strictly to the irrational criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact is leading to greater disparities, inequalities, unemployment and poverty?
Do you not think that it is time to pay attention to social sustainability?
One example is the situation in Portugal, where workers are to hold a general strike this week in protest at so-called austerity policies, which mean cuts in wages and investment, and which will trigger an even more severe recession.
Do you not think that it is time to change policies and give full priority to social sustainability and create solidarity mechanisms, particularly ...
(The President cut off the speaker)
Madam President, honourable Members, first of all, I wish to thank you for a very responsible debate.
Mrs Jaakonsaari said that the European Union has always developed through a series of crises.
That is largely true, and that is also the case this time, in the short term, while we have to be like the fire brigade and put out the fires that now blaze and threaten financial stability in Europe.
At present, we are working mainly in Ireland to safeguard the stability of the European economy.
At the same time, we are trying to build a longerterm European architecture that will actually strengthen economic union and reinforce monetary union, which is already sturdy at the moment, by means of robust and genuine economic union, which, in other words, means the implementation of the original objective for economic and monetary union.
Both are important tasks, and we cannot afford to neglect either.
Instead, we have to be like the fire brigade the whole time, putting out the forest fires and, at the same time, building a new European architecture for better regulation of the financial markets and for economic union to function more successfully.
Ireland is in difficulties.
Mrs Jaakonsaari is well aware that we in Finland have a saying that translates roughly as 'Help a man when he is in trouble, not when he is not': this also applies just as well to women, of course.
It is now very important that we all keep a cool head and try and support Ireland while it is in difficulties.
This is not just for Ireland itself but also for European economic stability, so that we do not allow the first green shoots of recovery to be harmed by this situation.
It is important that we make it possible for the European economy to grow sustainably and for us to be better capable of ensuring employment.
This is the very issue: sustainable growth in the European economy, and employment.
I want to thank you for the substance of the debate and indeed, I agree with Mr Gauzs that yes, we need to explain better why we are doing what we are doing, and we have to reassure our citizens.
These are tough and confusing times.
They are prone to nervousness and misinformation, and therefore we all need to do our share in communicating properly on the challenges.
Here the European Parliament and all of you, as citizens' representatives, have a key role to play.
It is not about finding someone to blame: it is about strengthening the European construction that has protected European citizens from much worse consequences.
Any talk of deconstruction of the European project is irresponsible.
All the Member States would have been in a much more difficult situation without the European Union and its protective shield.
The euro is, and continues to be, the cornerstone of the European Union; it is not only a technical monetary arrangement, it is indeed the core political project of the European Union.
Therefore, it is indeed essential that we do our best, do our utmost, to protect and reinforce this European construction.
I want to conclude by saying that Mrs Goulard made a very important point when she referred to the original objective of those who created the Economic and Monetary Union: to have a very strong political dimension, in fact, a political union.
President Trichet is better placed to testify on that than me because he was there then, but I would tend to agree, and that is why in our legislative package, which is now in your hands and in the hands of the Council, we want to supplement the strong monetary union by finally creating a genuine and strong economic union.
To my mind, it is indeed now high time in the EMU to fill the 'E' with life, and that is what the legislative package on reinforcing economic governance in the end is about.
Member of the Commission. - (in response to Mr De Rossa, who had spoken with the microphone off.) Madam President, as you well know, I am ready to meet with the Irish MEPs to discuss issues related to Ireland, but - no matter how important and difficult the situation in Ireland is at the moment - this debate is about the ECB and Parliament's report on the ECB.
There have been so many questions during this discussion concerning Ireland that it is simply not possible to respond to all of them.
As I said, I am ready to meet with the Irish MEPs and I hope I can meet with all of you tomorrow so that we can discuss this more precisely.
Firstly, let me say that the questions that have been asked are extremely pertinent and cover all the issues that are important today in great depth.
I will respond simultaneously to the Members of Parliament because a number of your questions converged.
First of all, I would like to restate: we are responsible for the 'M' of EMU, the monetary union.
We have a sentiment on the 'E', economic union, but we are responsible for the 'M' and what we have been instructed to do by the people of Europe, by the parliaments that voted the Maastricht Treaty, is to deliver price stability.
This is our mandate.
We are independent to deliver price stability to 330 million fellow citizens.
As I explained a moment ago, we have delivered price stability in line with our definition, which was in the continuity of the best definition in the world, and let me say that our definition of price stability now appears to be the global benchmark.
We have delivered price stability over the nearly 12 years of the euro and we are credible for the next ten years according to all the information we have.
So I want that to be very clear, because - as Olli Rehn said - many of the questions I have are questions that deal with the economic union, which is, of course, part of EMU, but we are not responsible ourselves for economic union.
We have our ideas; we have our recommendations; we have our diagnosis and analysis and I will come back to that of course.
My second major remark: we are experiencing the worst crisis since World War II at a global level.
Had we - both the central banks, including the ECB, and governments - not reacted rapidly and boldly, we would have experienced the worst crisis not since World War II, but since World War I, because we would have had a great depression and this fact - that we have avoided the great depression at global level - has called for immense action by governments and parliaments.
In our own analysis, the taxpayer risk that has been mobilised to help avoid a dramatic depression is approximately the same on both sides of the Atlantic in terms of GDP, approximately 27% of GDP.
It was not, of course, utilised in terms of spending, it was even less utilised in terms of losses, if I may say, but nevertheless, it is an immense effort that has been made.
Otherwise we would have had a dramatic crisis.
Of course, this means that the global finance and the global economy is extremely fragile and we have to find ways at a global level to avoid this fragility.
But this is not a European crisis.
It is the repercussion on Europe, on European governance, of a global crisis, and there is exactly the same kind of meditation and reflection on what to do in the US or in Japan, to mention only two other major advanced economies.
They also have problems of the first magnitude and I would like us not to transform what is a legitimate reflection on how to run major advanced economies better into a criticism of the euro which, as I said, has delivered exactly in line with what was expected.
Let me also say that when I look at the finance and fiscal position, the fiscal position of the major advanced economies, I can say that Europe as a whole and the EU area in particular is in a better situation - Mr Goebbels said this - than Japan or the US in terms of public financial deficit.
Perhaps something like around 6%, even a little bit less, as a consolidated fiscal position next year, when it is of the order of magnitude of ten or more in the two other major advanced economies.
I say that also for us to have an idea of the order of magnitude.
So what we have is bad behaviour on the part of a number of countries that are creating problems in their own country and are creating financial instability.
It is not the euro which is at stake; it is financial instability driven by bad behaviour of fiscal policies, of course, with the interaction with markets which is always there, as we are in market economies.
Again, fundamentally, our diagnosis is that what was abnormal in the functioning of Europe was that we had poor governance, poor governance of the economic union.
I can say, sadly, that this is not surprising because the Stability and Growth Pact has been criticised wrongly by some since the very beginning.
And I have to remind you that I was myself reporting in Parliament on our battle because major countries wanted to blow up the pact, or at least to considerably weaken it.
Sadly, I have to say that this was the major countries inside the euro area and that the small and medium-sized countries were resisting this tendency.
This was in 2004 and 2005.
You will remember it was a fierce battle because it went up to the Court of Justice, and the Commission - and I have to pay homage to the Commission - was lucid, more lucid at the time than the Council, and we were fully supporting the Commission.
So I have to remind all of you of that.
Now I have had a number of questions on precisely what we are calling for at this stage.
I have to say that we already said, when the Commission made its proposal, that we thought it was not enough.
Taking into account what we feel, taking into account what we see, in the functioning of Europe as a whole, the 27 and the 16 (and tomorrow 17), we considered that the first proposal of the Commission was too weak in terms of automaticity and in terms of rigour of the governance, both for the fiscal surveillance and for the competitiveness indicators, the imbalances.
So, to the extent that the present state of the proposal which is made by the Council is even weakening the Commission proposal, we cannot say anything to you, honourable Members of Parliament, but that we trust that we are up to the demands of the situation; and the demands of the situation are that we need very strong surveillance, very strong governance.
In 2005, on behalf of the Governing Council, I said that we were not satisfied at all by what was, at the time, the position of the Council, and what was finally accepted.
So I do not want to go further because we will have a number of occasions to be in contact with Parliament.
I have, of course, noted what Mrs Goulard said in terms of very hard work of Parliament, together with the Council and the Commission, to work out what will finally be the position of Europe.
But again, our message is very clear on that.
Now let me turn for just one minute to the issue of communication.
We have, of course, to permanently improve our communication.
We try to do that.
Let me only say that as regards our own communication, we are giving the clear definition of price stability which permits everybody to judge what we are doing permanently in real time.
I would also like to say that we were the first big major central bank to introduce press conferences immediately after the Governing Council.
We were the first to publish an introductory statement which is our diagnosis of the situation.
So we try to be as accountable in terms of communication as possible.
The only thing that we do not do is to publish the individual position of the various members of the Governing Council.
We trust that it is very important that for the institution which is issuing a currency for 16 states that are united in Europe, but are still sovereign states, it is better that it is the Governing Council as a whole which appears to be the pertinent entity in terms of our decision.
Now there were a number of very important questions.
Let me only mention the remark that we are responsible for the 'M', but to the extent that the 'E' is in the hands of the governments and of the Commission, we have in this domain, of course, to take into account the 'E', as always, as any independent central bank does: if the fiscal policy is sound and reasonable, the burden on the monetary policy to deliver price stability is light.
If we have a bad fiscal policy, then we are overburdening the decisions that have to be taken by the central bank.
I would say it is the same for us in terms of interaction with the governments, but we are fiercely independent and the fact that we have had to embark on a number of non-standard measures, as I have explained, was to allow us to transmit our monetary policy impulses as well as possible in circumstances where markets were not functioning correctly and therefore, the decisions that we were taking on interest rates were not transmitted correctly to the economy as a whole.
This is the essence of the non-standard measures, to help restore a more normal functioning of the monetary policy transmission channels and we very clearly made the distinction - I repeated that in a recent colloquy we had in which Ben Bernanke participated - between the standard measures that are really what counts in terms of monetary policy stance, and the non-standard measures designed to help the transmission of monetary policy.
Now let me only say that I also noted the important question ...
(FR) With regard to Mr Gauzs's question on communication, which I believe others have repeated, there is a tendency, in some communication channels, to consider Europe as some sort of scapegoat.
If things go wrong, it is Europe's fault.
We know that this is not true, and the European Parliament, of course, knows it better than anyone.
There is also a tendency to say that if things do not go well, it is the Commission's fault or it is the fault of the European Central Bank or, better still, it is the euro's fault.
This is the classic scapegoat phenomenon.
The euro is the currency that has maintained its internal and external stability remarkably well.
Moreover, I have not yet said that it is more remarkable than anything a central bank has ever done, within the founding countries of the euro, over the last 50 years - I saved that for last, if I may say so.
I believe that we have here a currency that is, in fact, solid, and solid in historical terms, too.
Therefore, let us beware of the scapegoat phenomenon.
I have to say that we all need to work very hard in terms of communication, but I also address that message to the European Central Bank and to the euro system as a whole; in other words, to all the national central banks that belong to the euro area. Moreover, I would say that this is also undoubtedly a problem faced by the 27, and hence a problem for the European Union as a whole.
(Applause)
Thank you very much for your detailed answer, Mr Trichet.
I think at this point it is necessary to give a more detailed answer than is usually the case in this House.
Madam President, I, too, would like to express my great thanks to Mr Trichet, Commissioner Rehn and, above all, the Members of this House for such an open and comprehensive debate.
It has been highly objective, even if, towards the end, our honourable Members from Ireland sometimes let their emotions show through - which is quite understandable.
In the brief time that I have available, I would like to mention three points.
The first is the independence of the European Central Bank.
I believe it was right and vital for the Heads of State or Government - under the general leadership of Helmut Kohl, a revered citizen of Europe and, at that time, the German Chancellor - to have instigated the independence of the ECB.
The European Central Bank is the guardian of the euro.
I believe that the euro has been as stable as it has in the recent months of the crisis precisely because, in the final event, we have such an ECB.
I would therefore ask you, Mr Trichet, to continue to act as independently as possible in the months ahead.
If people express their opinions to you, by all means listen to them; but in the final event, the president and managing board of the ECB must safeguard this independence.
Secondly, we need to be more open with the citizens of the European Union.
This is a important point.
Above all, we should not always provide them with information in the language of Brussels, for which we have come in for some criticism, but in such a way that it is genuinely understood by those to whom we are sending the message - the people of Europe.
As far as I am concerned, that is a very important point.
Finally, Mr Trichet mentioned Basel III.
This is another thing that I would certainly emphasise.
We want to implement Basel III promptly.
However, I only want to implement Basel III promptly if everyone at G20 level implements it simultaneously.
We cannot have Europe taking the lead once again and being the sole trailblazer, to the great detriment of our international competitiveness.
I would therefore argue that Europe should actually implement this together with its partners worldwide, or else consider what the alternatives are.
The joint debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow.
Written statements (Rule 149)
I, too, would like to congratulate Mr Balz for all his efforts in compiling this report.
The austerity packages proposed for exiting the crisis should not result in measures which could jeopardise economic recovery.
I believe that a balance needs to be struck between the economic consolidation process and the protection of investments through jobs and sustainable development.
The lesson provided by the Member States which have entered the euro area unprepared must make us think seriously about setting realistic deadlines over time.
In the current situation, a delay of one or two years may be acceptable.
Enlargement must continue, with the prerequisite of meeting the Maastricht criteria.
In this respect, I believe that adopting the euro should not be seen as a momentary solution, but as being part of a medium-term wide-ranging political strategy.
in writing. - I welcome and support this report.
However, we should keep in mind that, once all the talk about fiscal consolidation, regulation and macro-economic governance ends, we must examine what effect this has had on economic activity - which is the bottom line of any discussion.
The reality is that we need good and effective regulation and better economic governance so that small and medium-sized businesses, which are the main driver of economic growth, develop and grow.
The sad truth is that these businesses have suffered greatly in the past two years.
As a result, we have high and rising unemployment.
The ECB's policy of pumping in billions of euro to help save indebted banks was the right thing to do, but many banks have become over-reliant on the ECB's liquidity.
So now we have a situation where banks which provided credit too readily in the boom years are refusing to grant credit to small businesses.
If this continues then we will not have the growth needed to reduce budget deficits and government debt levels.
Unemployment will rise, and our economic performance will stagnate.
Let us act wisely if we do not want to fail the people of Europe again.
Common system of value added tax and duration of obligation to respect a minimum standard rate (debate)
The next item is the report by Mr Casa, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 2006/112/EC on the common system of value added tax, with regard to the duration of the obligation to respect a minimum standard rate - C7-0173/2010 -.
Madam President, first of all, I would like to draw this Chamber's attention to the fact that an important vote is currently under way within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, and therefore I have to excuse many of the Members who are not going to be present here as we are running late and the voting process has only just begun.
As the President rightly stated, this report I drew up is extremely important as it concerns the VAT system that we are seeking to amend.
Now, as everyone knows, the negotiations in order to modify the permanent VAT system have been ongoing for quite some time, yet no significant headway has been made.
The transitory system that has been used since 1993 is continuously being extended, and we all know that this situation is not a sustainable one and that we need to find a more lasting solution.
The current transitory system is not yielding the desired results when it comes to the internal market.
This system diminishes businesses' efficiency and also restricts their effectiveness between borders.
It is also worrying that this system gives rise to complex forms of fraud, such as carousel fraud, which we discussed recently within this very Parliament.
These bear a seriously negative impact on the Member States' income.
The solution facing us is not an easy one, and the right solution can be adopted only after an in-depth debate and long consultation periods have taken place.
We are all aware of the Commission's recent commitment to draw up a Green Paper in the near future in order to stimulate a discussion on this issue.
The report I am in charge of urges the Commission to ensure that the process is an efficient one and that we do everything in our power to ensure that, firstly, the new system will improve the internal market's effectiveness; secondly, that this new system reduces the burdens on the business sector; and thirdly, that it combats fraud as effectively as possible.
This report, which, as we know, has already been approved by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, also urges the Commission to ensure that the concrete proposals will be made public by 2013.
Let me underline this last point: I am not proposing that they should have a system that is adopted and in place by 2013.
I am saying that the proposals must be made public by 2013.
What I would like, however, and I believe I am expressing the viewpoint of the Members in this Chamber, is for this new system to be up and running before the end of this legislature, so that the current transitory system need not be re-extended.
Whilst we will approve the extension of the new system, we expect concrete steps to be taken without delay in reflecting upon these new proposals.
I would like to thank my colleagues, especially the shadow rapporteurs, for this report, and I augur that more fervent discussions on this topic will take place, which will give way to a speedy solution.
Member of the Commission. - Mr President, I would like to thank the European Parliament and, in particular, David Casa, for his constructive and quick report on the Commission's proposal to extend by five years the existing rules on the minimum standard VAT rate.
This proposal is simple and is not controversial.
A quick opinion of the European Parliament on the Commission's proposal will allow the Council to adopt the proposal before the end of the year - just in time, before the current rule expires.
The proposal has indeed already been discussed in the Council working party.
No obstacle appeared to a speedy approval.
As stated by David Casa, the Commission's proposal will give businesses the necessary legal certainty and allow further evaluation of the appropriate level of the standard VAT rate at EU level.
The Commission will indeed launch very soon a broad debate on the future of VAT in order to evaluate and address the numerous shortcomings in the EU VAT system such as its complexity, the high level of administrative burdens for businesses, and fraud.
Before the end of the year, I will propose to my fellow Commissioners the publication of a Green Paper on the evaluation of the current system and preferable ways forward for the future.
I am looking forward to reactions as regards such issues as how to achieve a simpler, more robust and modern VAT system and how to reduce collection and compliance costs for businesses, in particular, SMEs, whilst limiting fraud and providing flexibility for Member States.
On the basis of the results obtained, the Commission will define its future policy in the VAT area in a Communication on the way forward at the end of 2011.
The amendments tabled clearly demonstrate the Parliament's interest in participating in this discussion on the future VAT strategy.
I welcome this sign of interest and hope to have a fruitful debate with you on this important issue at a later stage.
However, I consider that these amendments are outside the scope of the proposal discussed today, which is limited to extending the period during which the minimum standard rate applies.
Moreover, some of the amendments pre-empt a debate we should have on the basis of the Green Paper.
This applies, in particular, to the amendment which requests the Commission to come up with a proposal on definitive rules on VAT rates by 2013.
At this stage, the Commission cannot commit on a date to table a proposal on VAT rates.
It cannot predict the outcome of the consultation, whose scope will be broader than the VAT rates.
I hope that this consultation will give a clear idea of the priorities for the future of VAT.
The Commission's planning for future legislative proposals will therefore depend to a great extent on the outcome of this consultation.
Mr President, the Commission's proposal focuses on allowing the current system to continue to run until 2015 and an endeavour to restrict tax rate bands to 10%.
This is very important, because otherwise, competition between Member States might be distorted in certain sectors.
Central to this parliamentary report is the notion that it will not be long before the Commission initiates a broad programme of consultation to establish a new system of value added tax.
In my opinion, the amendments that Members have tabled are, contrary to the view of the Commissioner, extremely important, as even at this stage, we want to mark the direction in which we hope that this new VAT system will go.
In future, we need to be able to lighten the administrative burden associated with VAT and make it as easy as possible for small and mediumsized enterprises, in particular, to produce reports, though at the same time effectively combating VAT fraud.
The public economy in many European countries at present is in a mess, and one solution proposed is to start to raise VAT rates.
However, that will not be of any help in countries where it is common to avoid paying VAT.
Here, I would like to refer to the report by Mr Casa adopted earlier on here. It focused, in particular, on ways to combat VAT fraud in connection with goods and services that were prone to this sort of abuse.
I hope that the Commission will actually start to do something about this in the future.
Mr President, as indicated in the Council's proposal for a directive, the minimum VAT rate has helped keep the system operating at an acceptable level.
I believe that we should consider having a common regulatory framework which would include the conclusions reached following the experience of the budgetary imbalances highlighted by the financial crisis.
A new European VAT strategy is required, focused on reducing red tape and the fiscal obstacles which hamper businesses, especially small and medium-sized enterprises.
We must also consider the need to prevent and combat fraud.
However, until this strategy has been finalised, I believe that the decision to extend the transitional provision on the minimum VAT rate until 31 December 2015 is intended to reassure the business community, prevent structural imbalances in the European Union and encourage harmonisation of fiscal legislation.
Pending the Commission Green Paper on the review of the VAT system, I would like to highlight the tendency of some governments facing recession to increase the VAT rate to 24-25%, as has happened in Romania and Hungary.
The relative commitment to keep the maximum VAT rate within a 10% range above the 15% limit has been observed up to now.
However, I believe that we need an absolute ban in this respect to prevent any breaches of the 25% threshold.
Let us not forget that beyond these statistics, we are dealing with ordinary citizens whose standard of living is being increasingly affected by austerity policies and excessive taxation.
I would like to end by saying that overtaxation is not a remedy for an ailing economy. It only serves to prolong the agony.
Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to thank the rapporteur very much.
As a matter of principle, I believe that we should avoid controlling consumption by means of VAT rates.
However, as long as exceptions and reduced VAT rates do not obviously interfere with the free market, we have hitherto chosen to accept differences between EU Member States.
However, as you well know, Professor Monti states in his report on the single market that current differences can also adversely affect the single market.
It is therefore important for us to call for a definitive system of VAT rates and to clearly point out that a review of the VAT Directive should use the single market strategy as a guideline rather than the separate interests of the individual countries.
It is also important, as the Commissioner says, for us to focus on reducing the administrative burdens, removing tax barriers and improving the business environment, particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises, while at the same time ensuring that we create a system that stands firm against fraud.
Taxes are, of course, a very national matter and one in which the nations' self-determination is important.
At the same time, it is important to remember that a well-functioning internal market probably requires more and closer cooperation, including with regard to matters of taxation, than we have today.
I therefore hope that the Commission - and the Commissioner - will have the courage to tackle these issues in its forthcoming proposals and that these proposals will actually take as their starting point a well-functioning internal market, despite national opposition.
Difficult questions in difficult times require detailed analysis.
(SK) Mr President, in the submitted proposal, the Commission proposes applying a minimum standard VAT rate of 15% for a further 5 years up to 2015.
Even though I understand the Commission's argument that it wants, through this directive, to provide companies with legal certainty, I think that the VAT analysis requires some very intensive work.
The reason for this, in my opinion, is that many companies and many cases of tax losses in cross-border trade show that the VAT system in Europe is very badly organised.
It is not just a problem of the actual rate; it is a problem of the rules applied on the national market and in international trade, which allow these scams to operate quite legitimately in many cases.
I would therefore like to use my speech to make a call for the review of the entire VAT system, which I think would be in the interests both of our economies and of our businesses.
I consider a deadline of 2013 to be quite realistic, and we should simply move forward on this problem not by sorting out the rates, but by sorting out the rules.
Mr President, taxes are, at best, a necessary evil, and should always reflect spending needs.
A tax rate that is set before spending needs are decided is a recipe for taking people's money and then deciding what to spend it on.
It is a recipe for profligacy.
Harmonisation of VAT rates to a common standard and a common reduced rate, which was the proposal of the Commission back in 1993, would take yet more power out of the hands of Member States.
The levying of taxation is one of the defining characteristics of a sovereign state.
It will be yet another step towards the sovereign state being the European Union, and Member States simply being powerless appendices to it.
Combating fraud and easing burdens on SMEs are red herrings.
VAT harmonisation is about centralisation and the consolidation of EU power.
(RO) Mr President, the aim of the new VAT strategy must be to reduce administrative burdens, remove fiscal obstacles and improve the business climate, especially for SMEs.
There is a noticeable degree of imbalance in relation to the development of the internal market. For this reason, European businesses have been put at a disadvantage.
In addition, the VAT system, as currently designed and implemented by Member States, has weaknesses that fraudsters use to their advantage.
I would like to call on the Commission to present the results of its analyses.
It will also have to arrange consultations on the new VAT strategy with all stakeholders.
In this respect, common aspects will have to be dealt with, such as reduced VAT rates, exemptions from the scheme, the option to set a maximum rate and, last but not least, the place of taxation of intra-EU supplies.
Member of the Commission. - Mr President, I want to thank you for the comments and the views expressed during this debate.
I am glad to see that the European Parliament and the Commission share views on the need to rethink the current VAT system.
As I indicated in my opening remarks, I welcome the spirit of the amendments relating to the future of VAT.
Nevertheless, the Commission considers that this technical proposal only concerns the periodical extension of the minimum level of the standard VAT rate.
The outcome of the consultations on a new VAT strategy is only mentioned in order to justify the reason why it is premature to set a permanent standard rate level.
There is therefore no need to refer to the aims and the framework of the new VAT strategy in this context at this stage.
I also repeat that the Commission cannot commit today on a date for the future legislative proposal on rates.
We will first need to have the debate on the future of VAT, which will give a clear idea on the priorities for the Commission.
The outcome of this consultation will steer the Commission's planning for the future legislative proposal.
We are finalising our work on the Green Paper and, in the coming weeks, we will produce the real questions for debate for everyone involved: the general public, Members of the European Parliament, stakeholders and the Member States.
The questions which will be raised clearly address issues which were raised during today's debate.
I am looking forward to fruitful debates in the coming months in order to enable the Commission to develop a much better strategy for VAT in the future.
Mr President, yes, I am indeed glad that the Commissioner has understood that we are calling for the drawing up of a Green Paper without delay in order to fuel a more in-depth debate on the Commission's proposals.
As my fellow Members in this Chamber have mentioned, we must quickly rid the system of all types of fraud and help the business sector as much as we can to eliminate the barriers that the current system creates.
We also want to see a more effective internal market.
Today, we did not discuss what solutions are required.
What we are asking of the Commission is to come up with proposals without delay so as to help instigate proper discussions on the new system, thus enabling us to improve upon what we currently have as soon as possible.
I understand that the aim of this report is, in actual fact, to extend the time period.
However, I would like to draw the Commission's attention to the fact that we are eager for it to present us with proposals as promptly as possible, as this will allow us to share our own ideas in turn, and ultimately guarantee a fairer system for everyone.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11:30.
Written statements (Rule 149)
For most EU Member States and third countries with internationally interlinked markets, VAT (or sales tax) is one of the main sources of financing for the state.
Sales tax is therefore at least as important as direct taxes.
Maintaining a minimum standard rate of 15% for the next 5 years will aid competition in the internal market and will provide legal certainty for companies.
With regard to the reduced VAT rates in the EU, in the case of reduced VAT rates on certain services, such as repairs, hairdressing or beauty treatment businesses, the Commission must also take care to avoid distortions of competition.
Such forms of tax relief have a negative effect on Austrian small businesses, for example, which may not be able to stand up to competition from Slovakian or Hungarian service providers.
The solution to this is as follows: YES to the targeted subsidising of SMEs, including by means of sales tax, BUT while avoiding distortions of competition between the Member States.
Urgent aid to Haiti (debate)
The next item is the Commission statement on urgent aid to Haiti.
Member of the Commission. - Mr President, the Commission is deeply concerned by the deterioration of the cholera situation in Haiti.
The number of casualties among the hospitalised cases is increasing sharply day by day.
The number of people admitted to hospitals comes to more than 20 000.
At the end of last week, more than 1 100 people had already lost their lives.
But it is feared that these figures are severely underestimated.
The fatality rate is very high and shows that people arrive too late at health centres.
Cholera treatment is simple, but early access to treatment is key to limiting fatalities.
Treating cholera patients also requires considerable human resources.
The Haitian public health system is now seriously overstretched, despite substantial support from the international community.
Mdecins sans Frontires, as one of the front-line medical actors, is calling on all groups and agencies present in Haiti to step up the size and speed of their efforts.
The whole country is now affected.
The epidemic is spreading at an alarming rate in the capital, Port-au-Prince.
Slums such as Cit Soleil are especially prone to contagion due to very bad hygiene conditions and poor access to clean water.
We are focusing on saving lives through prompt treatment of those affected, increasing access to clean water, promoting better hygiene behaviour and supporting epidemiological surveillance in order to know where and how the epidemic is evolving.
The Commission has reinforced its humanitarian presence with relevant medical expertise and mobilised funds - EUR 12 million - to support partners in Haiti.
The European mechanism for civil protection has also been activated through the Monitoring and Information centre of the European Commission and has already cofinanced the transport of in-kind assistance provided by France.
Another offer from Austria has just entered the pipeline.
An EU civil protection and technical support team with Member States' experts is to be deployed early this week.
Experts from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control have been deployed by DG SANCO to assess the best way to reinforce epidemiological surveillance in Haiti, and further cooperation is under consideration.
After the recent incidents related to civil unrest in Cap Haitien and Port-au-Prince, we are following closely the security situation with our partners and the relevant UN agencies, particularly ahead of the presidential elections of 28 November.
The Commission was in touch with the UN Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordination, Baroness Amos.
We fully support her in stressing the importance of allowing national and international aid workers to continue lifesaving activities without disruption.
Considering the serious and rapid deterioration of the cholera situation, further contributions are urgently required to fill gaps in health, water, sanitation, hygiene and logistics.
Priorities include medical personnel and other personnel specialised in water, sanitation and hygiene, as well as medical supplies, beds, water purification units and tablets.
The Commission is therefore in contact with the Belgian Presidency and the Member States to encourage further EU support to help Haiti at this very critical and difficult time.
EU support can be channelled through the EU Civil Protection Mechanism.
The endless efforts of Haitian and international aid workers to meet the current challenges on the ground are commendable, but it is clear that the sheer scale of the crisis requires even more assets and resources.
We are therefore now working hard on stepping up our emergency response together with our partners, but difficult times are certainly ahead, due to the rapidly evolving situation.
The continued solidarity of the international community with the Haitian people remains absolutely essential.
This is why I call upon you all to do your utmost to scale up the support of the Member States in order to avoid a major humanitarian disaster.
Mr President, Mrs Damanaki, ladies and gentlemen, the cholera epidemic has already claimed more than 1 200 lives, and more than 52 000 people are infected.
Thus, in spite of the strong presence of international organisations in Haiti, the situation is deteriorating daily, and the epidemic could infect some 400 000 people in the next few months.
I am, of course, delighted at the EUR 12 million released by the European Commission, and I support Mrs Georgieva's appeal to the Member States to provide aid in kind so that water can be purified, and to supply equipment.
Providing drinking water and toilet facilities is the only way to reduce the number of people infected.
One of the priority actions is to reassure the population frightened by this disease, which is unknown in the country.
Communicating with the populations is essential in order to provide information about the disease and to avert it, but also to prevent internal violence from spreading, especially since the country is in the middle of elections.
This new crisis has once again highlighted the inability of the Haitian authorities and of the health system to cope with this crisis.
The country has suffered numerous disasters for years.
The earthquake in Haiti demonstrated the almost total incompetence of the local authorities.
Following the earthquake, there was genuine political will to reconstruct Haiti differently, and there were many promises of donations.
Almost a year later, reconstruction has hardly begun, and those involved in development are pessimistic.
The European Commission must act as a driver in the reconstruction process so that Haiti finally emerges from this chaos.
Mr President, I welcome once again the swiftness of the European Union's humanitarian intervention.
However, at the same time, I believe that our efforts in this country must focus on building a minimum operational state structure at a time when the state of Haiti is just a sham.
It is failing to fulfil its basic duties such as organising refugee camps, maintaining order and providing hygienic conditions and drinking water.
This vulnerability has facilitated the rapid spread of disease and the death of more than 1 200 people.
Haiti needs a state which can do something for its poor.
Three out of four Haitians are surviving on less than USD 2 a day.
More than 1.5 million citizens are living in refugee camps, posing a serious source of risk to public health and safety.
I believe that the Haitian state's weakness is now the main risk factor.
Its lack of authority means that the population's discontent is being targeted at UN forces.
Indeed, NGOs risk no longer being able to accomplish their mission.
This is why the elections on 28 November are vital and must not be postponed, despite calls from some quarters.
Mr President, of course there are co-factors that have undoubtedly encouraged the spread of cholera in Haiti.
This is certainly not an answer, but it is an explanation.
The answer to this scourge must be twofold.
For the moment, the aid workers on the ground have confirmed to us that soap, substances to make the water fit to drink, and proper hygiene education are needed.
Preparations are being made in the present situation for the long term as well.
In a country in which everything is still to be done or redone, reconstruction is necessary after the earthquake, and priority must be given to building infrastructure that is designed to improve both individual and collective hygiene.
I hope that, eight months after the New York conference on the reconstruction of Haiti, it will no longer be possible to cite a lack of funds as an excuse for the little progress recorded to date, given that all the speakers agreed that the humanitarian phase must continue for many months yet.
It will also be necessary to name those responsible for the slow progress without too much beating about the bush.
on behalf of the Verts/ALE Group. - Mr President, we see in Haiti one of the hugest humanitarian aid operations ever.
We have to make sure that we do not lose the battle against this catastrophe and that we manage to get results and help Haitians to build their future.
Apart from being an individual disaster for millions of people, a failure would also be a backlash for the international community's effort and capacity to conduct a joint effort in humanitarian aid.
I believe that we have to put all our experience, all the lessons we have learnt in Haiti and elsewhere, and also enough money, into the pot.
Therefore, I very much welcome the Commission's announcement that it will put an additional EUR 12 million into the fight against cholera.
We have to make sure that this support reaches Haiti immediately, that it arrives in full and not just in part, and that we support the right initiatives in order to make it effective.
We also have to make sure that we do not neglect the efforts for the earthquake reconstruction because, without that, fighting disease will be impossible.
I have two questions to the Commission.
Firstly, I would like to know whether the pledged money has arrived - the money that was promised - and whether it was disbursed and absorbed.
Secondly, I would like to know what you think about postponing the elections, because that is again on the agenda.
The Haitian revolution has never managed to enter the history books.
Let us hope that the difficult time in Haiti at the moment will enter the history books as the starting point for preparing a better future for all Haitians.
I hope it can also be mentioned that the EU played a very positive role in this.
on behalf of the ECR Group. - Mr President, two months ago, I co-chaired the delegation under the ACP to Haiti and this was probably one of the greatest and most moving experiences of my life.
First, there are tremendously dedicated people there doing the work to try to help the Haitians, and second, the Haitian people are a very proud people and we should recognise that at the beginning of this debate.
But we were told by the President and the Prime Minister how lucky the Haitians were that they had good sanitation and that they had no disease - and the sad thing now is that disease has hit them.
This is not a terribly hard disease to cure.
But you have got to be there to see the conditions under which the aid workers are working and when you talk about a health service, I am sorry, Mr President, Haiti does not have a health service like the rest of us and you know it: they are dependent on Mdecins Sans Frontires, the British Red Cross and many other organisations from all around the world.
As far as the election is concerned, it is true that Haiti does not need an election at this moment.
But until they get a President and a Prime Minister who can lead them, they will have no chance of moving forward.
I want to commend - because when I was there I saw it for myself - the brilliant men and women of the European Commission Office, under terrible circumstances, trying to keep a European presence in Port-au-Prince, and they have done a fantastic job.
Mr President, I would first of all like to thank all my fellow Members, and especially the Conference of Presidents, for having agreed to this debate on Haiti, proposed by my group.
It was an emergency.
Last January, after the earthquake, the international community rallied round strongly in support of Haiti.
However, it seems that there was a gap, not to say a gulf, between the promises made and the aid that in fact arrived on the ground.
Last March, Baroness Ashton made a commitment, on behalf of the European Union, to provide aid worth EUR 1.235 billion to help the people of Haiti to build a better future.
Since last July, the NGOs and, in particular, MSF, Commissioner, have been sounding the alarm and reporting the pathogenic living conditions endured by hundreds of thousands of people.
The situation has scarcely changed since then, yet people are amazed that the cholera epidemic is spreading very fast, and the international community is again beginning to feel pity.
There have already been more than a thousand deaths, and the number of people affected is increasing all the time, even though specialists say that the measures to prevent the disease from proving fatal are relatively simple to take.
However, health workers have little training in this disease, and there are problems in getting basic healthcare products to where they are needed.
Under such circumstances, how can one fail to understand why riots have taken place?
The Haitian population feels quite helpless.
It is difficult for it to go on having confidence in the international community.
My questions will therefore be simple, Commissioner:
Where exactly is all the aid that the European Union promised to Haiti, and not just the humanitarian aid?
If it had arrived sooner, do you not think that this further tragedy could have been avoided?
How is it that, once again, international conferences seem to have resulted only in unkept promises?
Why are President Prval's efforts to turn MINUSTAH into support for reconstruction not meeting with any response?
Finally, the Haitian population wants the elections to take place, but under what conditions will they take place and what sort of support will the European Union provide?
(IT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, despite all the warnings which were made against neglecting the future of Haiti following the earthquake in January, the news in recent days seems to show that the island has been abandoned by the international community at the most critical moment, that of reconstruction.
Indeed, cholera, something which few people in Haiti know about and which is ultimately given a mystic, religious significance, is now spreading.
The United Nations peacekeepers have been accused of spreading this contagion.
It took just one Nepalese soldier on the island to become infected for hundreds of people, women and children, to besiege the general headquarters of the peace force.
Humanitarian workers have also felt threatened and many are leaving the country.
The tension is extremely high, and much of the rubble caused by the very violent earthquake of 12 January remains on the streets and in the town squares.
We have heard that there is not enough water and that it is therefore impossible for people to wash and to protect themselves against infection.
The vibrio is spreading rapidly, and the number of dead is rising exponentially.
The figures have already been given, but I want to repeat them: to date, there have been 1 130 victims, and the number of hospital admissions has risen to more than 18 000 in one month.
However, there are thousands of others who report symptoms of infection every day.
The international community cannot delay any longer.
A solution must be found immediately, otherwise any further infection will remain forever on our conscience.
Mr President, I would like to start by congratulating Commissioner Georgieva on the effective coordination work that she has undertaken and indeed the discussions that she is having with Baroness Amos at the UN.
The easiest and cheapest thing for this House to do now is to criticise.
I would like us to be positive and place the pressure where it needs to be.
I say this to all Members of this House.
We need to put pressure on our own Member States to bring forward more aid, and more aid in kind.
If you look at the list of countries, these are countries - such as Spain, Ireland, Italy, France, Austria, Hungary - currently facing grave economic situations, yet they have dug deep.
Therefore, I urge each and every one of us to contact our own governments and ask them to commit.
If there are questions as to whether aid is getting through or not, let us build the capacity to get the aid through.
Finally, I should like to thank the Commissioner and congratulate her on the commitment of the extra EUR 12 million.
The great tragedy is the earthquake.
The even greater tragedy now is this cholera epidemic.
(IT) Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, first the epicentre of a terrible earthquake, in precisely the poorest and worst-governed area in the American hemisphere, and now cholera in the country which receives one of the highest amounts of per capita international aid.
What a contradiction!
It is not just a terrible combination of bad luck: in Haiti, in the streets crowded with children and tents crammed in amongst the rubbish, no one knows where to begin.
The local political class is often greedy and focused on power games rather than taking control of the reconstruction efforts, and the bureaucratic machine, decimated by the earthquake, has a weak administrative culture and, in some cases, has even obstructed the distribution of aid.
There are many, often badly run, international organisations and, in fact, they have failed to protect the population.
Visiting the country with the European Parliament delegation in June, the concentration of abandoned fields, rubble which had not been removed and rubbish already gave a clear indication of how bad the situation could become.
Now cholera is here.
The Commission and the Directorate-General for Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection (ECHO) have so far done what was required, but they must now redouble their efforts.
My feeling is that now, as well as strong recovery action, Haiti needs greater protection at the international political level.
Mr President, this is a tragedy that does not bear talking about.
When the disaster struck in January last year, the international community descended on Haiti with great fanfare.
Military helicopters came to lift heavy pieces of masonry that had fallen down.
They have all gone.
They suddenly left.
Those pieces of masonry are blocking roads and there is no access, and the road network has broken down.
Commissioner Georgieva has been trying hard to coordinate the activities.
Why did this happen?
Why did all those people - including Secretary of State Clinton, who suddenly turned up there in January - suddenly disappear?
Why is the United Nations now being asked to disappear?
When are they going to ask the EU to disappear?
This is ridiculous.
We need the international community back there at the level at which it was working, and should let ordinary Haitians be depoliticised from this nonsense going on in the capital.
(SK) Mr President, Commissioner, I would like to thank you for the report you have presented to us on the current situation in Haiti.
The outbreak of another epidemic in Haiti was to be expected.
Since the start of the year, and since the earthquake, we have been working hard, but the work has not advanced as quickly as we hoped.
We have spoken often about the situation prevailing in Haiti before the earthquake.
It would certainly have helped us if Haiti had been a functioning state, but it is not, and nor will it be for a long time yet.
There is much ground to be covered.
There is now a need for urgent action, as we are risking further epidemics and further violence.
Commissioner, there is a real need to bring the best health experts together in Brussels, and to draw up a strategic aid plan for Haiti.
The situation must be resolved in the areas of security, finance and especially health.
(EL) Commissioner, I, too, should like to start by congratulating you on your outstanding work in the case of Haiti and for everything you have done in Pakistan.
We know that you will be present at every emergency.
This truly was a monumental disaster.
We are talking about over 1 000 dead and 15 000 sick and the numbers keep rising.
The needs are immense and we can see that the money at your disposal is not enough.
It is becoming increasingly clear that we really do need new financing instruments; perhaps - and obviously first of all - a transaction tax.
We need other financing mechanisms that can support our efforts to cope with increasing humanitarian needs.
We should also consider what we can do to prevent the transmission of diseases from people working for the UN from happening again.
(NL) Mr President, this afternoon, I received the latest information from a Dutch aid agency which has had a presence in Haiti for many years, and that information actually confirms the sombre, but realistic, picture that the Commission has described.
At the same time, the Dutch aid agency have told me that they have put their trust in Europe, in particular, as a major donor.
What is it then that they are relying on us to do?
Well, although a huge amount was pledged at the international donor conference, only a fraction of it has been received.
Now the United Nations has requested additional funding, but a large part of the money that has been pledged has not yet been received. I hope, therefore, that the European Union will take the lead in ensuring that the money really comes through because the situation in Haiti is distressing.
Of course, prevention and clean drinking water are the priorities.
I hope that the European Union will take the initiative to ensure good water supplies for Haiti.
Experts, the digging of water wells, clean drinking water and also medical care are particularly important.
All of these are in short supply.
I appeal to the Netherlands, but also to the European institutions, to ensure that they actually come to Haiti's aid immediately in this acute emergency.
(ES) Mr President, Commissioner Damanaki, first of all, I should like to congratulate the Commission for the efforts carried out in Haiti.
However, the situation requires an urgent and much stronger response.
We need more resources and a greater international commitment, despite the difficulties involved in mobilising funds in the current economic context.
It cannot be that funds are available for some problems but not for this humanitarian situation.
We have a number of health and humanitarian priorities: to inform the population about a specific disease, obtain tents, improve sanitation in all areas and provide access to clean water.
All these tasks are urgent and we need a great effort on the part of the Commission and all the Member States.
(FI) Mr President, I wish to thank Commissioner Georgieva for the work that the Commission has done.
It is very important that the European Union has a very strong and visible role to play in Haiti.
However, this is about our fellow human beings, our fellow creatures.
We also have a responsibility for them, as they have been the victims of an unparalleled catastrophe: first an earthquake and now a cholera epidemic.
It is important that when we send money and aid there, it gets to its destination quickly.
Many Christian aid organisations have been doing a good job there, and it appears that they also have effective channels for delivering aid promptly to those in need of it.
In this respect, I hope that the Commission can also make use of the recognised humanitarian and Christian organisations that are doing such good work there.
This way, it will be possible to get the aid to its destination and achieve the best possible result.
Member of the Commission. - Mr President, thank you all for your engagement and discussion on a topic that is, unfortunately, going to be with us for quite some time to come.
This is not an easy crisis to resolve.
We have had some estimates about the scale of the problem over the coming months - including from our own experts - and I agree very much with those who said we need to deploy expertise from the European Centre for Disaster Control in Haiti.
The estimates are that somewhere between half a million and 720 000 people will be infected before this wave of epidemics is over.
The Pan American Health Organisation estimate of 400 000 is a little lower but of the same order of magnitude.
So we will have to mobilise.
I agree with each and every one of you who spoke about immediate mobilisation and the need to help right now.
Let me make four points.
The first is how we can best help.
This is a time when we have to deploy true partner organisations and immediately give them the resources to act.
We also have to call on the Member States to provide in-kind assistance.
Since Thursday, when I addressed the Member States, we have been seeing support coming through, but more is needed in terms of healthcare professionals, water purification tablets and support for an awareness campaign, because - as many here have said - there is widespread misunderstanding of what this disease is and how it can best be treated.
As a result, people die unnecessarily because they are scared to go to treatment centres: they are afraid of catching the disease there rather than being treated for it.
Secondly, a number of speakers have talked about the pledged money and what is happening with reconstruction in Haiti.
The pledge made by the Commission has been honoured.
The Commission committed EUR 460 million and is delivering according to the timetable which it announced, and the High Representative and Vice-President, Cathy Ashton, and Commissioner Piebalgs are about to take stock with Member States on where we stand with the money we have promised to provide.
I can assure you that this is going to be taken very seriously, because the reputation of the international community is at stake at a very difficult time.
However - and this is my third point, which is a very important one - there is a limit to the absorptive capacity in Haiti, which I believe I talked about with some of you.
When I first arrived in Haiti, I thought that, terrible as this disaster was, it was not Haiti's worst problem.
Haiti's biggest problem was the many decades of lack of development and the absence of a functional state which, among other things, also means the absence of a functional health service.
I saw people in camps queuing in front of a doctor, not because they were sick, but because they had never seen a doctor in their lives and were taking advantage of a health service being offered in the camps.
This total lack of the skills and capabilities of a functional state creates problems that are making this epidemic worse.
We are still struggling to get the government to authorise space for the disposal of dead bodies - without which the epidemics can, of course, spread further - and to dislodge latrines so that sanitation can improve.
So I cannot stress strongly enough how critical it is for us to understand that Haiti's problems are not easy to resolve, because at the heart of this problem is these decades of lack of development and the absence of a functional state.
A question was asked about the elections and whether they should still be held.
The Haitian authorities prefer to stick to the timetable.
It is difficult for me to give an answer.
I have not yet been to Haiti, but my feeling is that cancelling or postponing the elections might actually destabilise a very difficult situation.
There may be something to be gained by holding the elections but, as I have said, this is based on what I have heard, not on what I have seen.
My fourth point concerns engagement.
You called for the Commission to be very directly engaged: we are, and will continue to be so.
Baroness Ashton will very probably be in Haiti tomorrow, and I am planning to go myself because at this point, mobilisation, good coordination and, frankly, also giving hope to people there, and to our own staff, are important.
Our own people are struggling with a very difficult situation: they are in places where the Haitian health officials become scared by the epidemic and just leave, and they then have to handle a massive increase in cases.
What we need to do now is to make sure that we retain a calm presence and try to steer the course for people which gives them the most hope.
One Member spoke about the Haitian people being very resilient.
They are, and they deserve all our help at this very difficult time.
The debate is closed.
Long-term plan for the anchovy stock in the Bay of Biscay and the fisheries exploiting that stock - Multiannual plan for the western stock of Atlantic horse mackerel and the fisheries exploiting that stock - Prohibition of highgrading and restrictions on fishing for flounder and turbot in the Baltic Sea, the Belts and the Sound - Use of alien and locally absent species in aquaculture (debate)
he next item is the joint debate on the following reports:
the report by Izaskun Bilbao Barandica, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a long-term plan for the anchovy stock in the Bay of Biscay and the fisheries exploiting that stock - C7-0157/2009 -,
the report by Pat the Cope Gallagher, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a multiannual plan for the western stock of Atlantic horse mackerel and the fisheries exploiting that stock - C7-0010/2009 -,
the report by Marek Jzef Grbarczyk, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation (EC) No 2187/2005 as regards the prohibition of highgrading and restrictions on fishing for flounder and turbot in the Baltic Sea, the Belts and the Sound - C7-0156/2010 -, and
the report by Joo Ferreira, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 708/2007 concerning the use of alien and locally absent species in aquaculture -.
rapporteur. - (ES) Mr President, I would firstly like to acknowledge, thank and congratulate the inshore fishing sector of the Bay of Biscay for its responsible behaviour.
Commissioner, the sector urgently needs this plan if it is to achieve its objective, namely, to carry on a profitable activity without jeopardising the future of the fishing ground.
This requires maintaining anchovy stocks in the Bay of Biscay at a level that allows for sustainable exploitation in economic, environmental and social terms.
This can be done much more effectively by calculating yields on the basis of scientific reports rather than allowing total allowable catch (TAC) calculations to become subject to obscure political negotiations.
The rules of exploitation must therefore be addressed in the plan, and this means that fishing quotas must be established on the basis of stock estimations obtained from scientific reports.
Commissioner, this initiative was tabled by the Commission in July 2009.
We started working in September.
We established a work procedure together with the entire Spanish and French sectors represented by fishermen's organisations, scientific institutes and the South Western Waters Regional Advisory Council.
Following this method, we worked on a joint proposal that received broad support in Parliament.
Having achieved a high level of consensus and being conscious of the impending entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and the uncertainty surrounding how it should be applied to cases that were already open, on 30 November, we held an indicative vote in the Committee on Fisheries.
This open and inclusive approach has run up against a very different attitude on the part of the Council and the Commission.
For a start, we learnt in the course of our work that a control regulation was being prepared which would affect this report, although we only received limited information on this matter.
